
Hooked:
How to Build Habit-Forming Products
By Nir Eyal
with Ryan Hoover

Copyright © 2014 Nir Eyal
All rights reserved.
ISBN: 1494277530
ISBN-13: 978-1494277536
Library of Congress Control Number:  2014900549
v 1.2

For Julie

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction
1. The Habit Zone
2. Trigger
3. Action
4. Variable Reward
5. Investment
6. What Are You Going To Do With This?
7. Case Study: The Bible App
8. Habit Testing and Where To Look For Habit-Forming Opportunities
Appendix
About the Authors
Acknowledgements
Contributors
Notes and Sources
Note: Some sections of this book have appeared in articles previously published by the author.

INTRODUCTION
 
79 percent of smartphone owners check their device within 15 minutes of waking up every morning.
[i]
Perhaps more startling, fully one-third of Americans say they would rather give up sex than lose their
cell phones.
[ii]
A 2011 university study suggested people check their phones 34 times per day.
[iii] However,
industry insiders believe that number is closer to an astounding 150 daily sessions.
[iv]
Face it, we’re hooked.
The technologies we use have turned into compulsions, if not full-fledged addictions. It’s the
impulse to check a message notification. It’s the pull to visit YouTube, Facebook, or Twitter for just a
few minutes, only to find yourself still tapping and scrolling an hour later. It’s the urge you likely feel
throughout your day but hardly notice.
Cognitive psychologists define habits as, “automatic behaviors triggered by situational cues:”
things we do with little or no conscious thought.
[v] The products and services we use habitually alter
our everyday behavior, just as their designers intended.
[vi] Our actions have been engineered.
How do companies, producing little more than bits of code displayed on a screen, seemingly
control users’ minds? What makes some products so habit-forming?
For many products, forming habits is an imperative for survival. As infinite distractions compete
for our attention, companies are learning to master novel tactics to stay relevant in users’ minds.
Today, amassing millions of users is no longer good enough. Companies increasingly find that their
economic value is a function of the strength of the habits they create. In order to win the loyalty of
their users and create a product that’s regularly used, companies must learn not only what compels
users to click, but also what makes them tick.
Although some companies are just waking up to this new reality, others are already cashing in. By
mastering habit-forming product design, the companies profiled in this book make their goods
indispensable.
First-To-Mind Wins
Companies who form strong user habits enjoy several benefits to their bottom line. These companies
attach their product to “internal triggers.” As a result, users show up without any external prompting.
Instead of relying on expensive marketing, habit-forming companies link their services to the users’
daily routines and emotions.
[vii] A habit is at work when users feel a tad bored and instantly open
Twitter. They feel a pang of loneliness and before rational thought occurs, they are scrolling through
their Facebook feeds. A question comes to mind and before searching their brains, they query Google.
The first-to-mind solution wins. In chapter one, this book explores the competitive advantages of
habit-forming products.
How do products create habits? The answer: They manufacture them. While fans of the television
show Mad Men are familiar with how the ad industry once created consumer desire during Madison
Avenue’s golden era, those days are long gone. A multi-screen world of ad-wary consumers has
rendered Don Draper’s big budget brainwashing useless to all but the biggest brands.
Today, small startup teams can profoundly change behavior by guiding users through a series of
experiences I call “hooks.” The more often users run through these hooks, the more likely they are to
form habits.

How I Got Hooked
In 2008, I was among a team of Stanford MBAs starting a company backed by some of the brightest
investors in Silicon Valley. Our mission was to build a platform for placing advertising into the
booming world of online social games.
Notable companies were making billions of dollars selling virtual cows on digital farms while
advertisers were spending huge sums of money to influence people to buy whatever they were
peddling. I admit I didn’t get it at first and found myself standing at the water’s edge wondering,
"How do they do it?"
At the intersection of these two industries dependent on mind manipulation, I embarked upon a
journey to learn how products change our actions and, at times, create compulsions. How did these
companies engineer user behavior? What were the moral implications of building potentially
addictive products? Most importantly, could the same forces that made these experiences so
compelling also be used to build products to improve people’s lives?
Where could I find the blueprints for forming habits? To my disappointment, I found no guide.
Businesses skilled in behavior design guarded their secrets and although I uncovered books, white
papers, and blog posts tangentially related to the topic, there was no how-to manual for building
habit-forming products.
I began documenting my observations of hundreds of companies to uncover patterns in user
experience designs and functionality. Although every business had its unique flavor, I sought to
identify the commonalities behind the winners and understand what was missing among the losers.
I looked for insights from academia: drawing upon consumer psychology, human-computer
interaction, and behavioral economics research. In 2011, I began sharing what I learned and started
working as a consultant to a host of Silicon Valley companies, from small startups to Fortune 500
enterprises. Each client provided an opportunity to test my theories, draw new insights, and refine my
thinking. I began blogging about what I learned at NirAndFar.com and my essays were syndicated to
other sites. Soon, readers began writing in with their own observations and examples.
In the fall of 2012, Dr. Baba Shiv and I designed and taught a class at the Stanford Graduate School
of Business on the science of influencing human behavior. The next year, I partnered with Dr. Steph
Habif to teach a similar course at the Hasso Plattner Institute of Design.
These years of distilled research and real-world experience resulted in the creation of the Hook
Model: a four-phase process companies use to forms habits. Through consecutive hook cycles,
successful products reach their ultimate goal of unprompted user engagement, bringing users back
repeatedly, without depending on costly advertising or aggressive messaging.
While I draw many examples from technology companies given my industry background, hooks are
everywhere — in apps, sports, movies, games, and even our jobs. Hooks can be found in virtually
any experience that burrows into our minds (and often our wallets). The four steps of the Hook Model
provide the framework for the chapters of this book.

The Hook Model
1. Trigger
A trigger is the actuator of behavior — the spark plug in the engine. Triggers come in two types:
external and internal.
[viii] Habit-forming products start by alerting users with external triggers like an
email, a website link, or the app icon on a phone.
For example, suppose Barbra, a young woman in Pennsylvania, happens to see a photo in her
Facebook newsfeed taken by a family member from a rural part of the state. It’s a lovely picture and
since she is planning a trip there with her brother Johnny, the external trigger’s call-to-action intrigues
her and she clicks. By cycling through successive hooks, users begin to form associations with
internal triggers, which attach to existing behaviors and emotions.
When users start to automatically cue their next behavior, the new habit becomes part of their
everyday routine. Over time, Barbra associates Facebook with her need for social connection.
Chapter two explores external and internal triggers, answering the question of how product designers
determine which triggers are most effective.
2. Action
Following the trigger comes the action: the behavior done in anticipation of a reward. The simple
action of clicking on the interesting picture in her newsfeed takes Barbra to a website called
Pinterest, a “pinboard-style photo-sharing” site.
[ix]
This phase of the hook, as described in chapter three, draws upon the art and science of usability
design to reveal how products drive specific user actions. Companies leverage two basic pulleys of
human behavior to increase the likelihood of an action occurring: the ease of performing an action and
the psychological motivation to do it.
[x]
Once Barbra completes the simple action of clicking on the photo, she is dazzled by what she sees
next.
 

3. Variable Reward
What distinguishes the Hook Model from a plain vanilla feedback loop is the hook’s ability to create
a craving. Feedback loops are all around us, but predictable ones don’t create desire. The
unsurprising response of your fridge light turning on when you open the door doesn’t drive you to
keep opening it again and again. However, add some variability to the mix — say a different treat
magically appears in your fridge every time you open it — and voila, intrigue is created.
Variable rewards are one of the most powerful tools companies implement to hook users; chapter
four explains them in further detail. Research shows that levels of the neurotransmitter dopamine
surge when the brain is expecting a reward.
[xi] Introducing variability multiplies the effect, creating a
focused state, which suppresses the areas of the brain associated with judgment and reason while
activating the parts associated with wanting and desire.
[xii] Although classic examples include slot
machines and lotteries, variable rewards are prevalent in many other habit-forming products.
When Barbra lands on Pinterest, not only does she see the image she intended to find, but she is
also served a multitude of other glittering objects. The images are related to what she is generally
interested in — namely things to see on her upcoming trip to rural Pennsylvania — but there are other
things that catch her eye as well. The exciting juxtaposition of relevant and irrelevant, tantalizing and
plain, beautiful and common, sets her brain’s dopamine system aflutter with the promise of reward.
Now she’s spending more time on Pinterest, hunting for the next wonderful thing to find. Before she
knows it, she’s spent 45 minutes scrolling.
Chapter four also explores why some people eventually lose their taste for certain experiences and
how variability impacts their retention.
4. Investment
The last phase of the Hook Model is where the user does a bit of work. The investment phase
increases the odds that the user will make another pass through the hook cycle in the future. The
investment occurs when the user puts something into the product of service such as time, data, effort,
social capital, or money.
However, the investment phase isn’t about users opening up their wallets and moving on with their
day. Rather, the investment implies an action that improves the service for the next go-around. Inviting
friends, stating preferences, building virtual assets, and learning to use new features are all
investments users make to improve their experience. These commitments can be leveraged to make
the trigger more engaging, the action easier, and the reward more exciting with every pass through the
hook cycle. Chapter five delves into how investments encourage users to cycle through successive
hooks.
As Barbra enjoys endlessly scrolling through the Pinterest cornucopia, she builds a desire to keep
the things that delight her. By collecting items, she’ll be giving the site data about her preferences.
Soon she will follow, pin, re-pin, and make other investments, which serve to increase her ties to the
site and prime her for future loops through the hook.
 
A New Superpower
Habit-forming technology is already here, and it is being used to mold our lives. The fact that we
have greater access to the web through our various connected devices — smartphones and tablets,
televisions, game consoles, and wearable technology — gives companies far greater ability to affect
our behavior.
As companies combine their increased connectivity to consumers, with the ability to collect, mine,

and process customer data at faster speeds, we are faced with a future where everything becomes
potentially more habit-forming. As famed Silicon Valley investor Paul Graham writes, "…unless the
forms of technological progress that produced these things are subject to different laws than
technological progress in general, the world will get more addictive in the next 40 years than it did in
the last 40."
[xiii] Chapter six explores this new reality and discusses the morality of manipulation.
Recently, a blog reader emailed me, “If it can’t be used for evil, it’s not a superpower.” He’s right.
And under this definition, building habit-forming products is indeed a superpower. If used
irresponsibly, bad habits can quickly degenerate into mindless zombie-like addictions.
Did you recognize Barbra and her brother Johnny from the previous example? Zombie film buffs
likely did. They are characters from the classic horror flick Night of the Living Dead, a story about
people possessed by a mysterious force, which compels their every action.
[xiv]
No doubt you’ve noticed the resurgence of the zombie genre over the past several years. Games
like Resident Evil, television shows like The Walking Dead, and movies including World War Z , are
a testament to the creatures’ growing appeal. But why are zombies suddenly so fascinating? Perhaps
technology’s unstoppable progress — ever more pervasive and persuasive — has grabbed us in a
fearful malaise at the thought of being involuntarily controlled.
Although the fear is palpable, we are like the heroes in every zombie film — threatened but
ultimately more powerful. I have come to learn that habit-forming products can do far more good than
harm. “Choice architecture,” as described by famed scholars Thaler, Sunstein, and Balz, offers
techniques to influence people’s decisions and affect behavioral outcomes. Ultimately though, the
practice should be, “used to help nudge people to make better choices (as judged by themselves).”
[xv]
Accordingly, this book teaches innovators how to build products to help people do the things they
already want to do but, for lack of a solution, don’t do.
Hooked seeks to unleash the tremendous new powers innovators and entrepreneurs have to
influence the everyday lives of billions of people. I believe the trinity of access, data, and speed
presents unprecedented opportunities to create positive habits. When harnessed correctly, technology
can enhance lives through healthful behaviors that improve our relationships, make us smarter, and
increase productivity.
The Hook Model explains the rationale behind the design of many successful habit-forming
products and services we use daily. Although not exhaustive given the vast amount of academic
literature available, the model is intended to be a practical tool (rather than a theoretical one) made
for entrepreneurs and innovators who aim to use habits for good. In this book, I have compiled the
most relevant research, shared actionable insights, and provided a practical framework designed to
increase the innovator’s odds of success.
Hooks connect the user’s problem with a company’s solution frequently enough to form a habit. My
goal is to provide you with a deeper understanding of how certain products change what we do, and
by extension, who we are.
***
How to Use this Book
At the end of each section, you’ll find a few bulleted takeaways. Reviewing them, jotting them down
in a notebook, or sharing them on a social network is a great way to pause, reflect, and reinforce what
you have read.
Building a habit-forming product yourself? If so, the “Do This Now” sections at the end of

subsequent chapters will help guide your next steps.
***
Remember and Share
- Habits are defined as behaviors done with little or no conscious thought.
- The convergence of access, data, and speed is making the world a more habit-forming place.
- Businesses that create customer habits gain a significant competitive advantage.
- The Hook Model describes an experience designed to connect the user's problem to a solution
frequently enough to form a habit.
- The Hook Model has four phases: trigger, action, variable reward, and investment.
[xvi]

1. THE HABIT ZONE
 
When I run, I zone out. I don’t think about what my body is doing and my mind usually wanders
elsewhere. I find it relaxing and refreshing, and run about three mornings each week. Recently, I
needed to take an overseas client call during my usual morning run time. “No biggie,” I thought. “I can
run in the evening instead.” However, the time-shift created some peculiar behaviors that night.
I left the house for my run at dusk and as I was about to pass a woman taking out her trash, she
made eye contact and smiled. I politely saluted with, “Good morning!” — then caught my mistake. “I
mean, good evening! Sorry!” I corrected myself, realizing I was about 10 hours off. She furrowed her
brow and cracked a nervous smile.
Slightly embarrassed, I noted how my mind had been oblivious to the time of day. I chided myself
not to do it again, but within a few minutes I passed another runner and again — as if possessed — I
blurted out, “Good morning!” What was going on?
Back home, during my normal post-run shower, my mind began to wander again as it often does
when I bathe. My brain’s autopilot switch turned on and I proceeded with my daily routine, unaware
of my actions.
It wasn’t until I felt the nick of the razor cutting my face that I realized I had lathered-up and started
shaving. Although it is something I do every morning, shaving was painfully unnecessary in the
evening. And yet, I’d done it anyway, unknowingly.
The evening version of my morning run had triggered a behavioral script that instructed my body to
carry out my usual, run-related activities — all without mindful awareness. Such is the nature of
ingrained habits — behaviors done with little or no conscious thought — which by some estimates,
guide nearly half of our daily actions.
[xvii]
Habits are one of the ways the brain learns complex behaviors. Neuroscientists believe habits give
us the ability to focus our attention on other things by storing automatic responses in the basal ganglia,
an area of the brain associated with involuntary actions.
[xviii]
Habits form when the brain takes a shortcut and stops actively deliberating over what to do next.
[xix]
The brain quickly learns to codify behaviors that provide a solution to whatever situation it
encounters.
For example, nail biting is a common behavior that occurs with little or no conscious thought.
Initially, the biter might start chomping on her cuticles for a reason — to remove an unsightly
hangnail, for example. However, when the behavior occurs for no conscious purpose — simply as an
automatic response to a cue — the habit is in control. For many persistent nail biters, the unconscious
trigger is the unpleasant feeling of stress. The more the biter associates the act of nail chomping with
the temporary relief it provides, the harder it becomes to change the conditioned response.
Like nail biting, many of our daily decisions are made simply because that was the way we have
found resolution in the past. The brain automatically deduces that if the decision was a good one
yesterday, then it is a safe bet again today and the action becomes a routine.
On my run, my brain had associated making eye contact with another person during my run with the
standard “Good morning!” greeting, thus I automatically uttered these words no matter how
inappropriately timed.
Why Habits are Good for Business

If our programmed behaviors are so influential in guiding our everyday actions, surely harnessing
the same power of habits can be a boon for industry. Indeed, for those able to shape them in an
effective way, habits can be very good for the bottom line.
Habit-forming products change user behavior and create unprompted user engagement. The aim is
to influence customers to use your product on their own, again and again, without relying on overt
calls-to-action such as ads or promotions. Once a habit is formed, the user is automatically triggered
to use the product during routine events such as wanting to kill time while waiting in line.
However, the framework and practices explored in this book are not one-size-fits-all and do not
apply to every business or industry. Entrepreneurs should evaluate how user habits impact their
particular business model and goals. While the viability of some products depends on habit-formation
to thrive, that is not always the case.
For example, companies selling infrequently bought or used products or services do not require
habitual users — at least, not in the sense of everyday engagement. Life insurance companies, for
instance, leverage salespeople, advertising, and word-of-mouth referrals and recommendations to
prompt consumers to buy policies. Once the policy is bought, there is nothing more the customer
needs to do.
In this book, I refer to products in the context of businesses that require ongoing, unprompted user
engagement and therefore need to build user habits. I exclude companies that compel customers to
take action through other means.
Before diving into the mechanics of how habits are made, we must first understand their general
importance and competitive benefits for businesses. Habit formation is good for business in several
ways.
Increasing Customer Lifetime Value
MBAs are taught that a business is worth the sum of its future profits. This benchmark is how
investors calculate the fair price of a company’s shares.
CEOs and their management teams are evaluated by their ability to increase the value of their
stocks — and therefore care deeply about the ability of their companies to generate free cash flow.
Management’s job, in the eyes of shareholders, is to implement strategies to grow future profits by
increasing revenues or decreasing expenses.
Fostering consumer habits is an effective way to increase the value of a company by driving higher
customer lifetime value (CLTV). CLTV is the amount of money made from a customer before she
switches to a competitor, stops using the product, or dies. User habits increase how long and how
frequently customers use a product, resulting in higher CLTV. 
Some products have a very high CLTV. For example, credit card customers tend to stay loyal for a
very long time and are worth a bundle. Hence, credit card companies are willing to spend a
considerable amount of money acquiring new customers. This explains why you receive so many
promotional offers, ranging from free gifts to airline bonus miles, to entice you to add another card or
upgrade your current one. Your potential CLTV justifies a credit card company’s marketing
investment.
Providing Pricing Flexibility
Renowned investor and Berkshire Hathaway CEO Warren Buffett once said, “You can determine the
strength of a business over time by the amount of agony they go through in raising prices.”
[xx] Buffett
and his partner, Charlie Munger, realized that as customers form routines around a product, they come

to depend upon it and become less price-sensitive. The duo have pointed to consumer psychology as
the rationale behind their famed investments in companies like See’s Candies and Coca-Cola.
[xxi]
Buffett and Munger understand that habits give companies greater flexibility to increase prices.
For example, in the free-to-play video game business, it is standard practice for game developers
to delay asking users to pay money until they have played consistently and habitually. Once the
compulsion to play is in place and the desire to progress in the game increases, converting users into
paying customers is much easier. Selling virtual items, extra lives, and special powers is where the
real money lies.
As of December 2013, more than 500 million people have downloaded Candy Crush Saga, a game
played mostly on mobile devices. The game’s “freemium” model converts some of those users into
paying customers, netting the game’s maker nearly a million dollars per day.
[xxii]
This pattern also applies to other services. Take Evernote, the popular note-taking and archiving
software, for example. The software is free to use but the company offers upgraded features like
offline viewing and collaboration tools for a price — which many devoted users are happy to pay.
Evernote’s CEO Phil Libin shared some revealing insights about how the company turns non-
paying users into revenue generating ones.
[xxiii] In 2011, Libin published a chart now known as the
“smile graph.” With the percentage of sign-ups represented on the Y-axis and time spent on the
service on the X-axis, the chart showed that, although usage plummeted at first, it rocketed upward as
people formed a habit of using the service. The resulting down and up curve gave the chart its
emblematic smile shape (and Evernote’s CEO a matching grin).
In addition, as usage increased over time, so did customers’ willingness to pay. Libin noted that
after the first month, only 0.5 percent of users paid for the service; however, this rate gradually
increased. By month 33, 11 percent of users had started paying. At month 42, a remarkable 26 percent
of customers were paying for something they had previously used for free.
[xxiv]
Supercharging Growth
Users who continually find value in a product are more likely to tell their friends about it. Frequent
usage creates more opportunities to encourage people to invite their friends, broadcast content, and
share through word-of-mouth. Hooked users become brand evangelists — megaphones for your
company, bringing in new users at little or no cost.
Products with higher user engagement also have the potential to grow faster than their rivals. Case
in point: Facebook leapfrogged its competitors, including MySpace and Friendster, even though it
was relatively late to the social networking party. Although its competitors both had healthy growth
rates and millions of users by the time Mark Zuckerberg’s fledgling site launched beyond the closed
doors of academia, his company came to dominate the industry.
Facebook’s success was, in part, a result of what I call the more is more principle — more
frequent usage drives more viral growth. As tech-entrepreneur turned venture capitalist, David Skok
points out, “The most important factor to increasing growth is ... Viral Cycle Time.”
[xxv] Viral Cycle
Time is the amount of time it takes a user to invite another user, and it can have a massive impact.
“For example, after 20 days with a cycle time of two days, you will have 20,470 users,” Skok writes.
“But if you halved that cycle time to one day, you would have over 20 million users! It is logical that
it would be better to have more cycles occur, but it is less obvious just how much better.”
Having a greater proportion of users returning to a service daily, dramatically increases Viral
Cycle Time for two reasons: First, daily users initiate loops more often (think tagging a friend in a

Facebook photo); second, more daily active users means more people to respond and react to each
invitation. The cycle not only perpetuates the process — with higher and higher user engagement, it
accelerates it.
 
Sharpening the Competitive Edge
User habits are a competitive advantage. Products that change customer routines are less susceptible
to attacks from other companies.
Many entrepreneurs fall into the trap of building products that are only marginally better than
existing solutions, hoping their innovation will be good enough to woo customers away from existing
products. But when it comes to shaking consumers’ old habits, these naive entrepreneurs often find
that better products don’t always win — especially if a large number of users have already adopted a
competing product.
A classic paper by John Gourville, a professor of marketing at Harvard Business School, stipulates
that, “Many innovations fail because consumers irrationally overvalue the old while companies
irrationally overvalue the new.”
[xxvi]
Gourville claims that for new entrants to stand a chance, they can’t just be better, they must be nine
times better. Why such a high bar? Because old habits die hard and new products or services need to
offer dramatic improvements to shake users out of old routines. Gourville writes that products that
require a high degree of behavior change are doomed to fail even if the benefits of using the new
product are clear and substantial.
For example, the technology I am using to write this book is inferior to existing alternatives in
many ways. I’m referring to the QWERTY keyboard which was first developed in the 1870s for the
now-ancient typewriter. QWERTY was designed with commonly used characters spaced far apart.
This layout prevented typists from jamming the metal typebars of early machines.
[xxvii] Of course, this
physical limitation is an anachronism in the digital age, yet QWERTY keyboards remain the standard
despite the invention of far better layouts.
Professor August Dvorak’s keyboard design, for example, placed vowels in the center row,
increasing typing speed and accuracy. Though patented in 1932, the Dvorak Simplified Keyboard was
written off.
QWERTY survives due to the high costs of changing user behavior. When first introduced to the
keyboard, we chicken-peck at the keys one-by-one, usually with just a finger or two. After months of
practice, we instinctively learn to activate all our fingers in response to our thoughts with little to no
conscious effort, and the words begin to flow effortlessly from mind to screen. But switching to an
unfamiliar keyboard — even if more efficient — would force us to re-learn how to type. Fat chance!
As we will learn in chapter five, users also increase their dependency on habit-forming products
by storing value in them — further reducing the likelihood of switching to an alternative. For
example, every email sent and received using Google’s Gmail is stored indefinitely, providing users
with a lasting repository of past conversations. New followers on Twitter increase users’ clout and
amplify their ability to transmit messages to their communities. Memories and experiences captured
on Instagram are added to one’s digital scrapbook. Switching to a new email service, social network,
or photo-sharing app becomes more difficult the more people use them. The non-transferrable value
created and stored inside these services discourages users from leaving.
Ultimately, user habits increase a business's return on investment. Higher customer lifetime value,
greater pricing flexibility, supercharged growth, and a sharpened competitive edge together equal a
more powerful bang for the company’s buck.

***
Building the Mind Monopoly
While user habits are a boon to companies fortunate enough to engender them, their existence
inherently makes success less likely for new innovations and startups trying to disrupt the status quo.
The fact is, successfully changing long-term user habits is exceptionally rare.
Altering behavior requires not only an understanding of how to persuade people to act — for
example, the first time they land on a webpage — but also necessitates getting them to repeat
behaviors for long periods, ideally for the rest of their lives.
Companies that succeed in building a habit-forming business are often associated with game-
changing, wildly successful innovation. But like any discipline, habit design has rules and caveats that
define and explain why some products change lives while others do not.
For one, new behaviors have a short half-life, as our minds tend to revert to our old ways of
thinking and doing. Experiments show that lab animals habituated to new behaviors tend to regress to
their first learned behaviors over time.
[xxviii] To borrow a term from accounting, behaviors are LIFO —
“last in, first out.” In other words, the habits you’ve most recently acquired are also the ones most
likely to go soonest.
This helps explain the overwhelming evidence that people rarely change their habits for long.
Two-thirds of alcoholics who complete a rehabilitation program will pick up the bottle, and their old
habits, within a year’s time.
[xxix] Research shows that nearly everyone who loses weight on a diet gains
back the pounds within two years.
[xxx]
The enemy of forming new habits is past behaviors, and research suggests that old habits die hard.
Even when we change our routines, neural pathways remain etched in our brains, ready to be
reactivated when we lose focus.
[xxxi] This presents an especially difficult challenge for product
designers trying to create new lines or businesses based on forming new habits.
For new behaviors to really take hold, they must occur often. In a recent study at the University
College London, researchers followed participants as they attempted to form a habit of flossing their
teeth.
[xxxii] As one of its findings, the study concluded that the more frequently the new behavior
occurred, the stronger the habit became. Like flossing, frequent engagement with a product —
especially over a short period of time — increases the likelihood of forming new routines.
Google Search provides an example of a service built upon a frequent behavior that helped create
users’ habits. If you’re skeptical that Google is habit-forming (and you are a frequent Google user),
just try using Bing. In a head-to-head comparison of the efficacy of an incognito search, the products
are nearly identical.
[xxxiii] Even if the geniuses at Google have in fact perfected a faster algorithm, the
time saved is imperceptible to everyone but robots and Mister Spock. Milliseconds matter, but they
don’t hook users.
So why haven’t more Google users switched to Bing? Habits keep users loyal. If a user is familiar
with the Google interface, switching to Bing requires cognitive effort. Although many aspects of Bing
are similar to Google, even a slight change in pixel placement forces the would-be user to learn a
new way of interacting with the site. Adapting to the differences in the Bing interface is what actually
slows down regular Google users and makes Bing feel inferior, not the technology itself. 
Internet searches occur so frequently that Google is able to cement itself as the one and only
solution in the habituated user’s mind. Users no longer need to think about whether or not to use
Google, they just do. Furthermore, whenever the company can identify the user through tracking

technology, it improves search results based on past behaviors to deliver a more accurate and
personalized experience, reinforcing the user’s connection with the search engine. The more the
product is used, the better the algorithm gets and thus, the more it is used. The result is a virtuous
cycle of habit-driven behavior resulting in Google’s market domination.
[xxxiv]
Habit as Strategy
Sometimes a behavior does not occur as frequently as flossing or Googling, but it still becomes a
habit. For an infrequent action to become a habit, the user must perceive a high degree of utility,
either from gaining pleasure or avoiding pain.
Take Amazon as an example: The e-tailer has its sights set on becoming the world’s one-stop shop.
Amazon is so confident in its ability to form user habits that it sells and runs ads for directly
competitive products on its site.
[xxxv] Customers often see the item they are about to buy listed at a
cheaper price and can click away to transact elsewhere. To some, this sounds like a formula for
disaster. But to Amazon, it is a shrewd business strategy.
Not only does Amazon make money from the ads it runs from competing businesses, but it also
utilizes other companies’ marketing dollars to form a habit in the shopper’s mind. Amazon seeks to
become the solution to a frequently occurring pain-point — the customer’s desire to find the items
they want.
By addressing shoppers’ price concerns, Amazon earns loyalty even if it doesn’t make the sale, and
comes across as trustworthy in the process. The tactic is backed by a 2003 study, which demonstrated
that consumers’ preference for an online retailer increases when they are offered competitive price
information.
[xxxvi] The technique has also been used by Progressive, the car insurance company, to drive
over $15 billion of annual insurance sales, up from just $3.4 billion before the tactic was
implemented.
By allowing users to comparison shop from within the site, Amazon provides tremendous
perceived utility to its customers. Although shopping on Amazon may not occur as frequently as
searching on Google, the company solidifies its place as the default solution to customers’ purchasing
needs with each successful transaction. In fact, people are so comfortable comparison shopping on
Amazon that they frequently use the company’s mobile app to check prices when standing in the aisles
of real stores — often making a purchase from inside a competing retailer.
[xxxvii]
In the Habit Zone
A company can begin to determine its product’s habit-forming potential by plotting two factors:
frequency (how often the behavior occurs) and perceived utility (how useful and rewarding the
behavior is in the user’s mind over alternative solutions).
Googling occurs multiple times per day, but any particular search is negligibly better than rival
services like Bing. Conversely, using Amazon may be a less frequent occurrence, but users receive
great value knowing they’ll find whatever they need at the one and only “everything store.”
[xxxviii]
As represented in figure 1, a behavior that occurs with enough frequency and perceived utility
enters the Habit Zone, helping to make it a default behavior. If either of these factors falls short and
the behavior lies below the threshold, it is less likely that the desired behavior will become a habit.
Note that the line slopes downward but never quite reaches the perceived utility axis. Some
behaviors never become habits because they do not occur frequently enough. No matter how much
utility is involved, infrequent behaviors remain conscious actions and never create the automatic

response that is characteristic of habits. On the other axis however, even a behavior which provides
minimal perceived benefit can become a habit simply because it occurs frequently.
Figure 1
This concept is meant to be a guiding theory and the scale of the illustration is intentionally left
blank. Unfortunately for companies, research thus far has not found a universal timescale for turning
all behaviors into habits. A 2010 study found that some habits can be formed in a matter of weeks
while others can take more than five months.
[xxxix] The researchers also found that the complexity of the
behavior and how important the habit was to the person greatly affected how quickly the routine was
formed.
There are few rules when it comes to answering “how frequent is frequent enough?” and the
answer is likely specific to each business and behavior. However, as the previously mentioned
flossing study demonstrates, we know that higher frequency is better.
Think of the products and services you would identify as habit-forming. Most of these are used
daily, if not multiple times per day. Now, let’s explore why we use these products so frequently.
***
Vitamins vs. Painkillers
It’s never been easier to launch a new product or service, yet most new endeavors fail. Why?
Products fail for a variety of reasons: Companies run out of funding, products enter markets too early
or too late, the marketplace doesn’t need what companies are offering, or founders simply give up.
Just as failure has many causes, success too can be attributed to a variety of factors. However, one
thing is common to all successful innovations — they solve problems. That may seem obvious, but
understanding the kind of problem a new product solves can be a topic of much debate.
“Are you building a vitamin or painkiller?” is a common, almost clichéd question many investors
ask founders eager to cash their first venture capital check. The correct answer, from the perspective
of most investors, is the latter: a painkiller. Likewise, innovators in companies big and small are

constantly asked to prove their idea is important enough to merit the time and money needed to build
it. Gatekeepers such as investors and managers want to invest in solving real problems — or, meeting
immediate needs — by backing painkillers.
Painkillers solve an obvious need, relieving a specific pain and often have quantifiable markets.
Think Tylenol, the brand name version of acetaminophen, and the product’s promise of reliable relief.
It’s the kind of ready-made solution for which people are happy to pay.
In contrast, vitamins do not necessarily solve an obvious pain-point. Instead they appeal to users’
emotional rather than functional needs. When we take our multivitamin each morning, we don't really
know if it is actually making us healthier. In fact, recent evidence shows taking multivitamins may
actually be doing more harm than good.
[xl]
But we don't really care, do we? Efficacy is not why we take vitamins. Taking a vitamin is a
"check it off your list" behavior we measure in terms of psychological, rather than physical, relief.
We feel satisfied that we are doing something good for our bodies — even if we can’t tell how much
good it is actually doing us.
Unlike a painkiller, which we can not function without, missing a few days of vitamin popping, say
while on vacation, is no big deal. So perhaps managers and investors know best? Perhaps building
painkillers, not vitamins, is always the right strategy.
Not so fast.
Let’s consider a few of today’s hottest consumer technology companies — say Facebook, Twitter,
Instagram, and Pinterest. What are they selling — vitamins or painkillers? Most people would guess
vitamins, thinking users aren’t doing much of anything important other than perhaps seeking a quick
boost of social validation. After all, think back to before you first started using these services. No one
ever woke up in the middle of the night screaming, “I need something to help me update my status!”
But like so many innovations, we did not know we needed them until they became part of our
everyday lives. Before making up your mind on the vitamin or painkiller debate for some of the
world’s most successful tech companies, consider this idea: A habit is when not doing an action
causes a bit of pain.
It is important to clarify that the term “pain,” as it is frequently used in business school and
marketing books, is somewhat hyperbolic. In reality, the experience we are talking about is more
similar to an “itch,” a feeling that manifests within the mind and causes discomfort until it is satisfied.
The habit-forming products we use are simply there to provide some sort of relief. Using a technology
or product to scratch the itch provides faster satisfaction than ignoring it. Once we come to depend on
a tool, nothing else will do.
My answer to the vitamin or painkiller question is that habit-forming technologies are both. These
services seem, at first, to be offering nice-to-have vitamins, but once the habit is established, they
provide an ongoing pain remedy.
Seeking pleasure and avoiding pain are two key motivators in all species. When we feel
discomfort, we seek to escape the uncomfortable sensation. In the next chapter, we will explore how
emotions, often negative ones, trigger users to reach for solutions. But for now, the important thing to
remember is that habit-forming products create associations in users’ minds — and that the solution to
their pain may be found in your product’s use.
We’ll discuss the morality of manipulation in chapter eight; however, it is worth noting that
although some people use the terms interchangeably, habits are not the same things as addictions.
Addictions are persistent, compulsive dependencies on a behavior or substance. Addictions, by
definition, are self-destructive. Thus, it is irresponsible to make products that rely on creating and

maintaining user addiction, since doing so would mean intentionally harming people. 
A habit, on the other hand, is a behavior that can have a positive influence on a person’s life.
Habits can be healthy or unhealthy, and you likely have several helpful habits you carry out throughout
your day. Did you brush your teeth today? Take a shower? Did you express gratitude by saying
“thanks?” Or in my case, say “Good morning” while on an evening jog? These are common behaviors
done with little or no deliberation — they are habits.
***
Diving Into The Hook Model
Ready to learn more about creating positive user habits? Read on to gain a deeper understanding of
the Hook Model: A simple yet powerful way to help your customers form habits that connect their
problem with your solution.
In the next chapters, we dive into each phase of the Hook Model. Along the way, I will provide
examples you can use in the design of your own product or service. By learning a few fundamentals of
how the mind works, you will increase your odds of building the right product faster.
By progressing users through the four steps of the Hook Model, — trigger, action, variable reward,
and investment — hooks form habits.
***
Remember and Share
- For some businesses, forming habits is a critical component to success, but not every business
requires habitual user engagement.
- When successful, forming strong user habits can have several business benefits including:
higher customer lifetime value, greater pricing flexibility, supercharged growth, and a sharper
competitive edge.
- Habits can not form outside the “Habit Zone,” where the behavior occurs with enough
frequency and perceived utility.
- Habit-forming products often start as nice-to-haves (vitamins) but once the habit is formed,
they become must-haves (painkillers).
- Habit-forming products alleviate users’ pain by relieving a pronounced itch.
- Designing habit-forming products is a form of manipulation. Product builders would benefit
from a bit of introspection before attempting to hook users to make sure they are building healthy
habits, not unhealthy addictions (more to come on this topic in chapter eight).
***
Do This Now
If you are building a habit-forming product, write down the answers to these questions:
- What habits does your business model require?
- What problem are users turning to your product to solve?
- How do users currently solve that problem and why does it need a solution?
- How frequently do you expect users to engage with your product?
- What user behavior do you want to make into a habit?



2. TRIGGER
 
Yin (not her real name) is in her mid-twenties, lives in Palo Alto, and attends Stanford University.
She has all the composure and polish you’d expect of a student at a prestigious school, yet she
succumbs to a persistent habit throughout her day. She can’t help it; she is compulsively hooked on
Instagram.
The photo and video-sharing social network, purchased by Facebook for $1 billion in 2012, has
captured the minds and attention of Yin and 150 million other users like her.
[xli] The company’s
acquisition demonstrates the increasing power of — and immense monetary value created by —
habit-forming technology. Of course, the Instagram purchase price was driven by a host of factors,
including a rumored bidding war for the company.
[xlii] But at its core, Instagram is an example of an
enterprising team — conversant in psychology as much as technology — that unleashed a habit-
forming product on users who subsequently made it a part of their daily routines.
[xliii]
Yin doesn’t realize she’s hooked, although she admits she regularly snaps and posts dozens of
pictures per day using the app. “It’s just fun,” she says as she reviews her latest collection of moody
snapshots filtered to look like they were taken in the late 1970s. “I don’t have a problem or anything. I
just use it whenever I see something cool. I feel I need to grab it before it’s gone.”
What formed Yin’s Instagram habit? How did this seemingly simple app become such an important
part of her life? As we will soon learn, habits like Yin’s are formed over time, but the chain reaction
that forms a habit always starts with a trigger.
Habits are not Created, They are Built Upon
Habits are like pearls. Oysters create natural pearls by accumulating layer upon layer of a nacre
called mother-of-pearl, eventually forming the smooth treasure over several years. But what causes
the nacre to begin forming a pearl? The arrival of a tiny irritant, such as a piece of grit or an
unwelcome parasite, triggers the oyster’s system to begin blanketing the invader with layers of
shimmery coating.
Similarly, new habits need a foundation upon which to build. Triggers provide the basis for
sustained behavior change.
Reflect on your own life for a moment. What woke you up this morning? What caused you to brush
your teeth? What brought you to read this book?
Triggers take the form of obvious cues like the morning alarm, but also come as more subtle,
sometimes subconscious signals that just as effectively influence our daily behavior. A trigger is the
actuator of behavior — the grit in the oyster that precipitates the pearl. Whether we are cognizant of
them or not, triggers move us to take action.
Triggers come in two types: external and internal.
External Triggers
Habit-forming technologies start changing behavior by first cueing users with a call-to-action. This
sensory stimuli is delivered through any number of things in our environment. External triggers are
embedded with information, which tells the user what to do next.
An external trigger communicates the next action the user should take. Often, the desired action is
made explicitly clear. For example, what external triggers do you see in this Coca-Cola vending

machine in figure 2?
Figure 2
Take a close look at the welcoming man in the image. He is offering you a refreshing Coke. The
text “Thirsty?” below the image tells you what the man in the photo is asking and prompts the next
expected action of inserting money and selecting a beverage.
Online, an external trigger may take the form of a prominent button, such as the large orange “Log
in to Mint” prompt in the email from Mint.com in figure 3. Here again, the user is given explicit
instructions about what action to take after reading the email: Click on that big bright button.
Figure 3
Notice how prominent and clear the intended action is in the email from Mint? The company could
have included several other triggers such as prompts to check your bank balance, view credit card
deals, or set financial goals. Instead, since this is an important account alert email, Mint has reduced
the available actions to a single click: Logging in to view and fix your account.
More choices require the user to evaluate multiple options. Too many choices or irrelevant options

can cause hesitation, confusion, or worse, abandonment.
[xliv] Reducing the thinking required to take the
next action increases the likelihood of the desired behavior occurring unconsciously. We’ll explore
this further in the next chapter.
The Coca-Cola vending machine and Mint.com email provide good examples of explicit external
triggers. However, external triggers can also convey implicit information about the next desired user
action. For example, we’ve all learned that website links are for clicking and app icons are for
tapping. The only purpose for these common visual triggers is to prompt the user to action. As a
readily accepted aspect of interface design, these calls to action don’t need to tell people how to use
them, the information is embedded.
 
Types of External Triggers
Companies can utilize four types of external triggers to move users to complete desired actions:
1. Paid Triggers
Advertising, search engine marketing, and other paid channels are commonly used to get users’
attention and prompt them to act. Paid triggers can be effective but costly ways to keep users coming
back. Habit-forming companies tend not to rely on paid triggers for very long, if at all. Imagine if
Facebook or Twitter needed to buy an ad to prompt users to revisit their sites — these companies
would soon go broke.
Since paying for re-engagement is unsustainable for most business models, companies generally
use paid triggers to acquire new users and then leverage other triggers to bring them back.
2. Earned Triggers
Earned triggers are free in that they can not be bought directly, but they often require investment in the
form of time spent on public and media relations. Favorable press mentions, hot viral videos, and
featured App Store placements are all effective ways to gain attention. Companies may be lulled into
thinking that related downloads or sales spikes signal long-term success, yet awareness generated by
earned triggers can be short-lived.
For earned triggers to drive ongoing user acquisition, companies must keep their products in the
limelight — a difficult and unpredictable task.
3. Relationship Triggers
One person telling others about a product or service can be a highly effective external trigger for
action. Whether through an electronic invitation, a Facebook “Like,” or old fashioned word-of-mouth,
product referrals from friends and family are often a key component of technology diffusion.
Relationship triggers can create the viral hypergrowth entrepreneurs and investors lust after.
Sometimes relationship triggers drive growth because people love to tell each other about a
wonderful offer.
For example, it is hard to top PayPal’s viral success of the late 1990s.
[xlv] PayPal knew that once
users started sending each other money online they would realize the tremendous value of the service.
The allure that someone just sent you money was a huge incentive to open an account, and PayPal’s
growth spread because it was both viral and useful.
Unfortunately, some companies utilize viral loops and relationship triggers in unethical ways by
deploying so-called “dark patterns.” When designers intentionally trick users into inviting friends or

blasting a message to their social networks, they may see some initial growth, but it comes at the
expense of the social currency of users, including their goodwill and trust. When people discover
they’ve been duped, they vent their frustration and stop using the product.
Proper use of relationship triggers requires building an engaged user base that is enthusiastic about
sharing the benefits of the product with others. 
4. Owned Triggers
Owned triggers consume a piece of real-estate in the user’s environment. They consistently show up
in daily life and it is ultimately up to the user to opt into allowing these triggers to appear.
For example, an app icon on the user’s phone screen, an email newsletter to which the user
subscribes, or an app update notification only appear if the user wants it there. As long as the user
agrees to receive a trigger, the company that sets the trigger owns a share of the user’s attention.
Owned triggers are only set after users sign up for an account, submit their email address, install an
app, opt into newsletters, or otherwise indicate they want to continue receiving communications.
While paid, earned, and relationship triggers drive new user acquisition, owned triggers prompt
repeat engagement until a habit is formed. Without owned triggers and users’ tacit permission to enter
their attentional space, it is difficult to cue users frequently enough to change their behavior.
***
But external triggers are only the first step. The ultimate goal of all external triggers is to propel users
into and through the Hook Model so that, after successive cycles, they do not need further prompting
from external triggers. When users form habits, they are cued by a different kind of trigger: internal
triggers.
Internal Triggers
When a product becomes tightly coupled with a thought, an emotion, or a pre-existing routine, it
leverages an internal trigger. Unlike external triggers, which use sensory stimuli like a morning alarm
clock or giant “Log-In Now” button, you can’t see, touch, or hear an internal trigger. Internal triggers
manifest automatically in your mind. Connecting internal triggers with a product is the brass ring of
consumer technology.
For Yin, the young woman with the Instagram habit, her favorite photo app manufactured a
predictable response cued by an internal trigger. Through repeated conditioning, a connection was
formed between Yin’s need to capture images of the things around her and the app on her ever-present
mobile device.
Emotions, particularly negative ones, are powerful internal triggers and greatly influence our daily
routines. Feelings of boredom, loneliness, frustration, confusion, and indecisiveness often instigate a
slight pain or irritation and prompt an almost instantaneous and often mindless action to quell the
negative sensation. For instance, Yin often uses Instagram when she fears a special moment will be
lost forever.
The severity of the discomfort may be relatively minor — perhaps her fear is below the
perceptibility of consciousness — but that’s exactly the point. Our life is filled with tiny stressors and
we’re usually unaware of our habitual reactions to these nagging issues.
Positive emotions can also serve as internal triggers, and may even be triggered themselves by a
need to satisfy something that is bothering us. After all, we use products to find solutions to problems.
The desire to be entertained can be thought of as the need to satiate boredom. A need to share good

news can also be thought of as an attempt to find and maintain social connections.
As product designers, it is our goal to solve these problems and eliminate pain — to scratch the
user’s itch. Users who find a product that alleviates their pain will form strong, positive associations
with the product over time. After continued use, bonds begin to form — like the layers of nacre in an
oyster — between the product and the user whose need it satisfies. Gradually, these bonds cement
into a habit as users turn to your product when experiencing certain internal triggers.
A study at the Missouri University of Science and Technology illustrates how tech solutions can
provide frequent psychological relief.
[xlvi] In 2011, a group of 216 undergraduates volunteered to have
their Internet activity anonymously tracked. Over the course of the academic year, the researchers
measured the frequency with which these students used the web and what they were doing online.
At the end of the study, the researchers compared anonymized data of students who visited the
university’s health services to treat symptoms of depression. “We identified several features of
Internet usage that correlated with depression,” wrote Sriram Chellappan, one of the study’s
authors.
[xlvii] “For example, participants with depressive symptoms tended to engage in very high email
usage…Other characteristic features of depressive Internet behavior included increased amounts of
video watching, gaming, and chatting.”
The study demonstrated that people suffering from symptoms of depression used the Internet more.
Why is that? One hypothesis is that those with depression experience negative emotions more
frequently than the general population and seek relief by turning to technology to lift their mood.
Consider, perhaps, your own emotion-cued behaviors. What do you do in response to your internal
triggers?
When bored, many people seek excitement and turn to dramatic news headlines. When we feel
overly stressed we seek calm, perhaps finding relief in sites like Pinterest. When we feel lonely,
destinations like Facebook and Twitter provide instant social connections.
To ameliorate the sensation of uncertainty, Google is just a click away. Email, perhaps the mother
of all habit-forming technology, is a go-to solution for many of our daily agitations, from validating
our importance (or even, simply our existence) by checking to see if someone needs us, to providing
an escape from life's more mundane moments.
Once hooked, using these products does not always require an explicit call-to-action. Instead, they
rely upon our automatic responses to feelings that precipitate the desired behavior. Products that
attach to these internal triggers provide users with quick relief. Once a technology has created an
association in users’ minds that the product is the solution of choice, they return on their own, no
longer needing prompts from external triggers.
In the case of internal triggers, the information about what to do next is encoded as a learned
association in the user’s memory.
But the association between an internal trigger and your product is not formed overnight. It can take
weeks or months of frequent usage for internal triggers to latch onto cues. New habits are sparked by
external triggers, but associations with internal triggers are what keeps users hooked.
As Yin said, “I just use it whenever I see something cool.” By thoughtfully moving users from
external to internal triggers, Instagram designed a persistent routine in people’s lives. A need is
triggered in Yin’s mind every time a moment is worth holding onto, and for her, the immediate
solution is Instagram. Yin no longer requires an external stimulus to prompt her to use the app — the
internal trigger happens on its own.
Building for Triggers

Products that successfully create habits soothe the user’s pain by laying claim to a particular feeling.
To do so, product designers must know their user's internal triggers — that is, the pain they seek to
solve. But finding customers’ internal triggers requires learning more about people than what they can
tell you in a survey. It requires digging deeper to understand how your users feel.
The ultimate goal of a habit-forming product is to solve the user’s pain by creating an association
so that the user identifies the company’s product or service as the source of relief.
First, the company must identify the particular frustration or pain-point in emotional terms, rather
than product features. But how does a designer go about uncovering the source of a user’s pain? The
best place to start is to learn the drivers behind successful habit-forming products — not to copy
them, but to understand how they solve users’ problems. Doing so will give you practice in diving
deeper into the mind of the consumer and alert you to common human needs and desires.
As Evan Williams, co-founder of Blogger and Twitter said, the Internet is, “a giant machine
designed to give people what they want.”
[xlviii] Williams continued, “We often think the Internet enables
you to do new things … But people just want to do the same things they’ve always done.”
These common needs are timeless and universal. But talking to users to reveal these wants will
likely prove ineffective since they themselves don’t know which emotions motivate them. People just
don’t think in these terms. You’ll often find that people’s “declared preferences” — what they say
they want — are far different from their “revealed preferences” — what they actually do.
As Erika Hall, author of Just Enough Research writes, “When the research focuses on what
people actually do (watch cat videos) rather than what they wish they did (produce cinema-quality
home movies) it actually expands possibilities.”
[xlix] Looking for discrepancies exposes opportunities.
Why do people really send SMS messages? Why do they take photos? What role does watching
television or sports play in their lives? Ask yourself what pain these habits solve and what the user
might be feeling right before one of these actions.
What would your user want to achieve by using your solution? Where and when will they use it?
What emotions influence their use and will trigger them to action?
Jack Dorsey, co-founder of Twitter and Square, shared how his companies answer these important
questions, “[If] you want to build a product that is relevant to folks, you need to put yourself in their
shoes and you need to write a story from their side. So, we spend a lot of time writing what's called
user narratives.”
[l]
Dorsey goes on to describe how he tries to truly understand his user, “He is in the middle of
Chicago and they go to a coffee store ... This is the experience they're going to have. It reads like a
play. It's really, really beautiful. If you do that story well, then all of the prioritization, all of the
product, all of the design and all the coordination that you need to do with these products just falls out
naturally because you can edit the story and everyone can relate to the story from all levels of the
organization, engineers to operations to support to designers to the business side of the house.”
Dorsey believes a clear description of users — their desires, emotions, the context with which they
use the product — is paramount to building the right solution. In addition to Dorsey's user narratives,
tools like customer development,
[li] usability studies, and empathy maps
[lii] are examples of methods for
learning about potential users.
One method is to try asking the question "why" as many times as it takes to get to an emotion.
Usually this will happen by the fifth “why.” This is a technique adapted from the Toyota Production
System described by Taiichi Ohno as the “5 Whys Method.” Ohno wrote that it was "the basis of
Toyota's scientific approach ... by repeating ‘why?’ five times, the nature of the problem as well as

its solution becomes clear."
[liii]
When it comes to figuring out why people use habit-forming products, internal triggers are the root
cause, and “why?” is a question that can help drill right to the core.
For example, let's say we're building a fancy new technology called email for the first time. The
target user is a busy middle manager named Julie. We've built a detailed narrative of our user, Julie,
that helps us answer the following series of "whys:"
Why #1: Why would Julie want to use email?
Answer: So she can send and receive messages.
Why #2: Why would she want to do that?
Answer: Because she wants to share and receive information quickly.
Why #3: Why does she want to do that?
Answer: To know what’s going on in the lives of her co-workers, friends, and family.
Why #4: Why does she need to know that?
Answer: To know if someone needs her.
Why #5: Why would she care about that?
Answer: She fears being out of the loop.
Now we've got something! Fear is a powerful internal trigger and we can design our solution to
help calm Julie’s fear. Of course, we might have come to another conclusion by starting with a
different persona, varying the narrative or coming up with different hypothetical answers along the
chain of "whys.” Only an accurate understanding of our user's underlying needs can inform the
product requirements.
But now that we have an understanding of the user’s pain, we can move on to the next step of
testing our product to see if it solves her problem.
Unpacking Instagram’s Triggers
A large component of Instagram’s success — and what brings its millions of users back nearly
every day — is the company’s ability to understand its users’ triggers. For people like Yin, Instagram
is a harbor for emotions and inspirations, a virtual memoir preserved in pixels.
Yin’s habitual use of the service started with an external trigger - a recommendation from a friend
and weeks of repetitious use before she became a regular user.
Every time Yin snaps a picture, she shares it with her friends on Facebook and Twitter. Consider
the first time you saw an Instagram photo. Did it catch your attention? Did it make you curious? Did it
call you to action?
These photos serve as a relationship external trigger, raising awareness and serving as a cue for
others to install and use the app. But Instagram photos shared on Facebook and Twitter were not the
only external triggers driving new users. Others learned of the app from the media and bloggers, or
through the featured placement Apple granted Instagram in the App Store — all earned external
triggers.
Once installed, Instagram benefited from owned external triggers. The app icon on users’ phone
screens and push notifications about their friends’ postings served to call them back.
With repeated use, Instagram formed strong associations with internal triggers, and what was once
a brief distraction became an intraday routine for many users.
It is the fear of losing a special moment that instigates a pang of stress. This negative emotion is the

internal trigger that brings Instagram users back to the app to alleviate this pain by capturing a photo.
As users continue to use the service, new internal triggers form.
But Instagram is more than a camera replacement, it is a social network. The app helps users dispel
boredom by connecting them with others, sharing photos, and swapping lighthearted banter.
[liv]
Like many social networking sites, Instagram also alleviates the increasingly recognizable “pain”
known as “fear of missing out,” or FOMO. For Instagram, associations with internal triggers provide
a foundation to form new habits.
Now it is time to understand the mechanics of connecting the user’s problem with your solution by
utilizing the next step in the Hook Model. In the next chapter, we’ll find out how moving people from
triggers to actions is critical in establishing new routines.
***
Remember and Share
- Triggers cue the user to take action and are the first step in the Hook Model.
- Triggers come in two types — external and internal.
- External triggers tell the user what to do next by placing information within the user’s
environment.
- Internal triggers tell the user what to do next through associations stored in the user’s
memory.
- Negative emotions frequently serve as internal triggers.
- To build a habit-forming product, makers need to understand which user emotions may be tied
to internal triggers and know how to leverage external triggers to drive the user to action.
***
Do This Now
Refer to the answers you came up with in the last “Do This Now” section to complete the following
exercises:
- Who is your product’s user?
- What is the user doing right before your intended habit?
- Come up with three internal triggers that could cue your user to action. Refer to the “5 Whys
Method” described in this chapter.
- Which internal trigger does your user experience most frequently?
- Finish this brief narrative using the most frequent internal trigger and the habit you are
designing:
“Every time the user (internal trigger), he/she (first action of intended habit).”
- Refer back to the question about what the user is doing right before the first action of the
habit. What might be places and times to send an external trigger?
- How can you couple an external trigger as closely as possible to when the user’s internal
trigger fires?
- Think of at least three conventional ways to trigger your user with current technology (emails,
notifications, text messages, etc.). Then stretch yourself to come up with at least three crazy, or
currently impossible, ideas for ways to trigger your user (wearable computers, biometric sensors,
carrier pigeons, etc.). You may find that your crazy ideas spur some new approaches, which may
not be so crazy after all. In a few years, new technologies will create all sorts of currently
unimaginable triggering opportunities.



3. ACTION
 
The next step in The Hook is the action phase. The trigger, driven by internal or external cues,
informs the user of what to do next; however, if the user does not take action, the trigger is useless. To
initiate action, doing must be easier than thinking. Remember, a habit is a behavior done with little or
no conscious thought. The more effort — either physical or mental — required to perform the desired
action, the less likely it is to occur.
Action vs. Inaction
If action is paramount to habit-formation, how can a product designer influence users to act? Is there a
formula for behavior? It turns out there is.
While there are many theories about what drives human behaviors, Dr. BJ Fogg, Director of the
Persuasive Technology Lab at Stanford University, has developed a model that serves as a relatively
simple way to understand what drives our actions.
Fogg posits that there are three ingredients required to initiate any and all behaviors: (1) the user
must have sufficient motivation; (2) the user must have the ability to complete the desired action; and
(3) a trigger must be present to activate the behavior.
The Fogg Behavior Model is represented in a formula, B = MAT, which represents that a given
behavior will occur when motivation, ability, and a trigger are present at the same time and in
sufficient degrees.
[lv] If any component of this formula is missing or inadequate, the user will not cross
the “Action Line” and the behavior will not occur.
Let’s walk through an example Fogg uses to explain his model. Imagine a time when your mobile
phone rang but you didn’t answer it. Why not?
Perhaps the phone was buried in a bag, making it difficult to reach. In this case your inability to
easily answer the call inhibited the action. Your ability was limited.
Maybe you thought the caller was a telemarketer, someone you did not want to speak to. So, your
lack of motivation influenced you to ignore the call.
Or, maybe the call was important and within arm’s reach, but the ringer on your phone was
silenced. Despite having both a strong motivation and easy access to answer the call, it was
completely missed because you never heard it ring — in other words, no trigger was present.
In the previous chapter, we covered triggers, so now let’s dive deeper into the other two
components of the Fogg Behavior Model: motivation and ability.
Motivation
While a trigger cues an action, motivation defines the level of desire to take that action. Dr. Edward
Deci, Professor of Psychology at the University of Rochester and a leading researcher on Self-
Determination Theory, defines motivation as, "the energy for action."
[lvi]
While the nature of motivation is a widely contested topic in psychology, Fogg argues that three
Core Motivators drive our desire to act.
Fogg states that all humans are motivated to seek pleasure and avoid pain, to seek hope and avoid
fear, and finally, to seek social acceptance and avoid rejection. The two sides of the three Core
Motivators can be thought of as levers to increase or decrease the likelihood of a person taking a
particular action by increasing or decreasing their motivation.

Motivation Examples in Advertising
Perhaps no industry makes the elements of motivation more explicit than the advertising business.
Advertisers regularly tap into people’s motivations to influence their habits. By looking at ads with a
critical eye, we can identify how they attempt to influence our actions.
For example, Barack Obama's 2008 presidential campaign leveraged a deeply inspiring message
and image during a time of economic and political upheaval. An iconic poster designed by artist
Shepard Fairey conveyed the idea of “hope,” not only with the word printed in bold letters along the
bottom of the image, but also through Obama’s steadfast gaze as he looked confidently toward the
future. (Unfortunately, the image was at the center of a copyright battle between Fairey and the
Associated Press, which claimed ownership of the original photograph used in the artwork, so I’ve
chosen to not to include it here. If you can’t recall the image, there is a link in the endnotes).
[lvii]
Another example of motivation in advertising relates to the old saying, “sex sells.” Long an
advertising standard, images of buff, scantily clad (and usually female) bodies are used to hawk
everything from the latest Victoria’s Secret lingerie to domain names through GoDaddy.com and fast
food chains such as Carl’s Jr. and Burger King (figure 4). These and countless others use the
voyeuristic promise of pleasure to capture attention and motivate action.
Figure 4
Of course, this strategy only appeals to a particular demographic's association with sex as a salient
motivator. While teenage boys — the common target for these ads — may find them inspiring, others
may find them distasteful. What motivates some people will not motivate others, a fact that provides
all the more reason to understand the needs of your particular target audience.
Sometimes the psychological motivator is not as obvious as those used by Obama supporters or
fast food chains. The Budweiser ad in figure 5 illustrates how the beer company uses the motivator of
social cohesion by displaying three “buds,” cheering for their national team. Although beer is not
directly related to social acceptance, the ad reinforces the association that the brand goes together
with good friends and good times.

Figure 5
On the flip-side, negative emotions such as fear can also be powerful motivators. The ad in figure
6 shows a disabled man with a shocking head scar. The ad is impactful, communicating the risks of
not wearing a motorcycle helmet. The words, "I won't wear a helmet it makes me look stupid," along
with the patient’s mental age (post-motorcycle accident) of two-years old, send a chilling message.
Figure 6
As described in the previous chapter on triggers, understanding why the user needs your product or
service is critical. While internal triggers are the frequent itch experienced by users throughout their
days, the right motivators create action by offering the promise of desirable outcomes (i.e., a
satisfying scratch).
However, even with the right trigger enabled and motivation running high, product designers often
find users still don’t behave the way they want them to. What’s missing in this equation? Usability, or
rather, the ability of the user to take action easily.
Ability
In his book, Something Really New: Three Simple Steps to Creating Truly Innovative Products
[lviii],
author Denis J. Hauptly deconstructs the process of innovation into its most fundamental steps. First,

Hauptly says, understand the reason people use a product or service. Next, lay out the steps the
customer must take to get the job done. Finally, once the series of tasks from intention to outcome is
understood, simply start removing steps until you reach the simplest possible process.
Consequently, any technology or product that significantly reduces the steps to complete a task will
enjoy high adoption rates by the people it assists. For Hauptly, easier equals better.
But can the nature of innovation be explained so succinctly? Perhaps a brief detour into the
technology of the recent past will illustrate the point.
A few decades ago, a dial-up Internet connection seemed magical. All users had to do was boot-up
their computers, hit a few keys on their desktop keyboards, wait for their modems to screech and
scream as they established connections, and then, perhaps 30 seconds to a minute later, they were
online. Checking email or browsing the nascent World Wide Web was terribly slow (by today’s
standards), but offered unprecedented convenience compared to finding information any other way.
The technology was remarkable and soon became a ritual for millions of people accessing this new
marvel known as the Internet.
Of course, today few of us could stand the torture of using a 2400 baud modem after we’ve become
accustomed to our always-on, high-speed Internet connections. Emails are now instantaneously
pushed to the devices in our pockets. Our photos, music, videos, and files — not to mention the
vastness of the open web — are accessible almost anywhere, anytime, on any connected device. 
In line with Hauptly’s assertion, as the steps required to get something done (in this case, to get
online and use the Internet) were removed or improved upon, adoption increased.
For example, consider the trend-line of the relationship between the percentage of people creating
content online and the increasing ease of doing so, as shown in figure 7.
Figure 7
Web 1.0 was categorized by a few content providers like C|net (now called CNET) or the New
York Times publishing to the masses, with only a tiny number of people creating what others read.
But in the late 1990s, blogging changed the web. Before blogging, amateur writers had to purchase

their own domain, fiddle with DNS settings, find a web host, and set up a content-management system
to present their writing. Suddenly, new companies like Blogger eliminated most of these steps by
allowing users to simply register an account and start posting.
Evan Williams, who co-founded Blogger and later Twitter, echoes Hauptly’s formula for
innovation when he describes his own approach to building two massively successful companies.
[lix]
“Take a human desire, preferably one that has been around for a really long time… Identify that
desire and use modern technology to take out steps.” Blogger made posting content online
dramatically easier. The result? The percentage of users creating content online, as opposed to simply
consuming it, increased.
Along came Facebook and other social media tools, refining earlier innovations such as Bulletin
Board Systems (BBS) and Really Simple Syndication (RSS) feeds into tools for status update-hungry
users.
Then, seven years after Blogger’s birth, a new company described at first as a “micro-blogging”
service sought to bring sharing to the masses — Twitter. For many, blogging was still too difficult
and time-consuming. But anyone could type short, casual messages. “Tweeting” began to enter the
national lexicon as Twitter gained wider adoption, climbing to 500 million registered users by
2012.
[lx] Critics first discounted Twitter’s 140-character message limitation as gimmicky and
restrictive. But little did they realize the constraint actually increased users’ ability to create. A few
keyboard taps and users were sharing. As of late 2013, 340 million tweets were sent every day.
More recently, companies such as Pinterest, Instagram and Vine have elevated online content
creation to a new level of simplicity. Now, just a quick snap of a photo or re-pin of an interesting
image shares information across multiple social networks. The pattern of innovation shows that
making a given action easier to accomplish spurs each successive phase of the web, helping to turn
the once-niche behavior of content publishing into a mainstream habit.
As recent history of the web demonstrates, the ease or difficulty of doing a particular action
impacts the likelihood that a behavior will occur. To successfully simplify a product, we must
remove obstacles that stand in the user’s way. According to the Fogg Behavior Model, ability is the
capacity to do a particular behavior.
***
Fogg describes six “elements of simplicity” — the factors that influence a task’s difficulty.
[lxi] These
are:
- Time - How long it takes to complete an action.
- Money - The fiscal cost of taking an action.
- Physical Effort - The amount of labor involved in taking the action.
- Brain Cycles - The level of mental effort and focus required to take an action.
- Social Deviance - How accepted the behavior is by others.
- Non-Routine - According to Fogg, “How much the action matches or disrupts existing routines.”
To increase the likelihood of a behavior occurring, Fogg instructs designers to focus on simplicity as
a function of the user's scarcest resource at that moment. In other words, identify what the user is
missing. What is making it difficult for the user to accomplish the desired action?
Is the user short on time? Is the behavior too expensive? Is the user exhausted after a long day of
work? Is the product too difficult to understand? Is the user in a social context where the behavior

could be perceived as inappropriate? Is the behavior simply so far outside of the user’s normal
routine that its strangeness is off-putting?
These factors will differ by person and context, so designers should ask, "What is the thing that is
missing that would allow my users to proceed to the next step?" Designing with an eye toward
simplifying the overall user experience reduces friction, removes obstacles, and helps push the user
across Fogg’s action line.
The action phase of the Hook Model incorporates Fogg’s six elements of simplicity by asking
designers to consider how their technology can facilitate the simplest actions in anticipation of
reward. The easier an action, the more likely the user is to do it and to continue the cycle through the
next phase of the Hook Model.
Below are examples of simple online interfaces used by a number of successful companies to
prompt users to move quickly into the Hook’s next phase.
Logging In with Facebook
Traditionally, registering for a new account with an app or website requires several steps. The user
is prompted to enter an email address, create a password, and submit other information such as a
name or phone number. This burden introduces significant friction, detracting users from signing-up.
Mobile devices present the special challenge of smaller screens and slower typing speeds.
However, today it is nearly impossible to browse the web or use a mobile app without
encountering a Facebook Login prompt (figure 8). Many companies have eliminated several steps in
the registration process by enabling users to register with their sites by using their existing Facebook
credentials.
Figure 8
While the Facebook login function is useful for time-starved people, it should be noted that for
others, the tool doesn’t necessarily ease registration. For example, users who are wary of how
Facebook might share their personal information may not find the login button helpful because it may
trigger new anxieties (and thus, brain cycles) about the social networking giant’s trustworthiness.
Again, the roadblocks confronting users vary by person and context. There is no one-size-fits-all
solution, so designers should seek to understand an array of possible user challenges.
 
Sharing with the Twitter Button
Twitter helps people share articles, videos, photos or any other content they find on the web. The

company noticed that 25 percent of tweets contained a link and therefore sought to make the action of
tweeting a website link as easy as possible.
[lxii]
To ease the way for link-sharers, Twitter created an embeddable Tweet button for third-party sites,
allowing them to offer visitors a one-click way to tweet directly from their pages (figure 9). The
external trigger opens a preset message, reducing the cognitive effort of composing the tweet and
saving several steps to sharing.
Figure 9
Searching with Google
Google, the world’s most popular search engine, was not the first to market. It competed against
incumbents such as Yahoo!, Lycos, AltaVista, and Excite when it launched in the late 1990s. How did
Google come to dominate the multi-billion dollar industry?
For one, Google’s PageRank algorithm proved to be a much more effective way to index the web.
By ranking pages based on how frequently other sites linked to them, Google improved search
relevancy. Compared with directory-based search tools such as Yahoo!, Google was a massive time-
saver. But Google also beat out other search engines that had become polluted with irrelevant content
and cluttered with advertising (figure 10). From its inception, Google’s clean and simple homepage
and search results pages were solely focused on streamlining the act of searching and getting relevant
results (figure 11).

Figure 10 - The Yahoo homepage circa 1998
Figure 11 - The Google homepage circa 1998
Simply put, Google reduced the amount of time and the cognitive effort required to find what the
user was looking for. The company continues to relentlessly improve its search engine by finding new
ways to remove whatever might be in the user’s way — no matter how seemingly trivial. While its
homepage remains remarkably pristine, Google now offers myriad tools to make searching easier and
faster — including automatic spelling correction, predictive results based on partial queries, and
search results that load even as the user is typing. Google’s efforts are intended to make searching
easier to keep users coming back.
Taking Photos with the Apple iPhone
Many of life’s most treasured moments come and go in an instant. We try and capture these memories
in photos, but if our camera is out of reach or too cumbersome to catch the shot, we lose those
moments forever. Apple recognized it could help iPhone owners take more photos by making picture-
taking easier. The company made the camera app directly launchable from the locked screen, without
requiring a password. Compared to the number of steps needed to access photo apps on other
smartphones, the simple flick gesture of the native iPhone camera gives it a virtual monopoly as
users’ go-to solution whenever they need to snap a quick pic (figure 12).

Figure 12
Scrolling with Pinterest
How can a website make browsing easier? One solution popularized by digital pinboard site,
Pinterest, is the infinite scroll. In the past, getting from one web page to the next required clicking and
waiting. However on sites such as Pinterest, whenever the user nears the bottom of a page, more
results automatically load. Users never have to pause as they continue scrolling through pins or posts
without end (figure 13).
Figure 13
***
The examples above show how simplicity increases the intended user behaviors.
 
Motivation or Ability — Which Should You Increase First?
After uncovering the triggers that prompt user actions and deciding which actions you want to turn
into habits, you can increase motivation and ability to spark the likelihood of your users taking a

desired behavior. But which should you invest in first, motivation or ability? Where is your time and
money better spent?
The answer is always to start with ability.
Of course, all three parts of B=MAT must be present for a singular user action to occur; without a
clear trigger and sufficient motivation, there will be no behavior. But for companies building
technology solutions, the greatest return on investment will generally come from increasing a
product’s ease-of-use.
The fact is, increasing motivation is expensive and time-consuming. Website visitors tend to ignore
instructional text. Their attention is split on several tasks at once and they have little patience for
explanations about why or how they should do something. Instead, influencing behavior by reducing
the effort required to perform an action is more effective than increasing someone’s desire to do it.
Make your product so simple that users already know how to use it, and you’ve got a winner.
The Evolution of Twitter’s Homepage
In 2009, the Twitter homepage was cluttered with text and dozens of links (figure 14). The page was
confusing, especially for new users unfamiliar with the product. Twitter’s value proposition of
sharing what you were doing with friends and family failed to resonate with most users, who
wondered, "why would I want to broadcast my activities?" The page design demanded a high level of
attention and comprehension.
Figure 14 - The Twitter homepage in 2009
A year later, Twitter redesigned its homepage, touting itself as a service to “share and discover
what’s happening” (figure 15). Although the page became more focused on action, it was still visually
onerous. Even more unfortunate, the task users were most likely to do — search — was not what
Twitter really wanted them to do. Twitter management knew from early users that those who
followed other people on the service were more likely to stay engaged and form a habit. But
searching on Twitter was not helping that goal, so the company decided to make another switch.

Figure 15 - The Twitter homepage in 2010
During the company’s period of hypergrowth, the Twitter homepage became radically more simple
(figure 16). The product description is itself only 140 characters long and has evolved from the
cognitively difficult request that users broadcast their information (as seen in 2009), to the less taxing
“Find out what’s happening, right now, with the people and organizations you care about.”
Figure 16 - The Twitter homepage in 2012
The big bold image of people looking into some kind of light-emanating event, like a concert or a
soccer match, metaphorically communicates the value of the service while piquing curiosity. Most
strikingly, the page has two very clear calls-to-action: sign in or sign up. The company made the
desired action as simple as possible, knowing that getting users to experience the service would yield
better results than trying to convince them to use it while still on the homepage.
Of course, it is worth noting that Twitter was in a different place in 2012 than in 2009. People
came to the site having heard more about the service as its popularity grew. Twitter’s homepage
evolution reveals how the company discovered its users’ scarcest resource. In 2009, the Twitter
homepage attempted to boost motivation. But by 2012, Twitter had discovered that no matter how
much users knew about the service, driving them to open an account and start following people
resulted in much higher engagement.
Recently, Twitter’s homepage has been modified slightly to encourage downloading of the
company’s mobile apps (figure 17). The simplicity of the large sign-in or sign-up triggers on the 2012
version remain, but Twitter now knows that driving users to install the app on their phones leads to
the highest rates of repeat engagement.

Figure 17 - The Twitter homepage in 2013
On Heuristics and Perception
So far, we have discussed Fogg’s Core Motivators and the six elements of simplicity as levers for
influencing the likelihood of a particular behavior occurring. These factors echo ideals of how people
react when making rational decisions. For example, every Economics 101 student learns that as
prices decrease, consumers purchase more — in Fogg’s terms, an example of increasing ability by
decreasing price.
However, although the principle seems elementary, the law, like many other theories of human
behavior, has exceptions. The field of behavioral economics, as studied by luminaries such as Nobel
Prize winner Daniel Kahneman, exposed exceptions to the rational model of human behavior. Even
the notion that people always consume more if something costs less, for example, is a tendency, not an
absolute.
There are many counterintuitive and surprising ways companies can boost users’ motivation or
increase their ability by understanding heuristics — the mental shortcuts we take to make decisions
and form opinions. It is worth mentioning a few of these brain biases. Even though users are often
unaware of these influences on their behavior, heuristics can predict their actions.
The Scarcity Effect
In 1975, researchers Worchel, Lee, and Adewole wanted to know how people would value cookies
in two identical glass jars.
[lxiii] One jar held ten cookies while the other contained just two stragglers.
Which cookies would people value more?
While the cookies and jars were identical, participants valued the ones in the near-empty jar more
highly. The appearance of scarcity affected their perception of value.
There are many theories as to why this is the case. For one, scarcity may signal something about the
product. If there are fewer of an item, the thinking goes, it might be because other people know
something you don’t. Namely, that the cookies in the almost-empty jar are the better choice. The jar
with just two cookies left in it conveys valuable, albeit irrelevant, information since the cookies are

identical. Yet, the perception of scarcity changed their perceived value.
In the second part of their experiment, the researchers wanted to know what would happen to the
perception of the value of the cookies if they suddenly became scarce or abundant. Groups of study
participants were given jars with either two cookies or ten. Then, the people in the group with ten
cookies suddenly had eight taken away. Conversely, those with only two cookies had eight new
cookies added to their jars. How would these changes affect the way participants valued the cookies?
Results remained consistent with the scarcity heuristic. The group left with only two cookies rated
them to be more valuable, while those experiencing sudden abundance by going from two to ten,
actually valued the cookies less. In fact, they valued the cookies even lower than people who had
started with ten cookies to begin with. The study showed that a product can decrease in perceived
value if it starts off as scarce and becomes abundant.
For an example of how perception of a limited supply can increase sales, look no further than
Amazon.com. My recent search for a DVD revealed there were “only 14 left in stock” (figure 18),
while a search for a book I’ve had my eye on says only three copies remain. Is the world’s largest
online retailer almost sold out of nearly everything I want to buy or are they using the scarcity
heuristic to influence my buying behavior?
Figure 18 - “Only 14 left in stock”?
 
The Framing Effect
Context also shapes perception. In a social experiment, world-class violinist Joshua Bell decided to
play a free impromptu concert in a Washington, DC subway station.
[lxiv] Bell regularly sells out venues
such as the Kennedy Center and Carnegie Hall for hundreds of dollars per ticket, but when placed in
the context of the DC subway, his music fell upon deaf ears. Almost nobody knew they were walking
past one of the most talented musicians in the world.
The mind takes shortcuts informed by our surroundings to make quick and sometimes erroneous
judgments. When Bell performed his concert in the subway station, few stopped to listen. But when
framed in the context of a concert hall, he can charge beaucoup bucks.
But the framing heuristic not only influences our behaviors — it literally changes how our brain
perceives pleasure. For example, a 2007 study attempted to measure if price had any influence on the
taste of wine.
[lxv] The researchers had study participants sample wine while in an fMRI machine.
As the machine scanned the blood flow in the various regions of their brains, the tasters were
informed of the cost of each wine sampled. The sample started with a $5 wine and progressed to a
$90 bottle. Interestingly, as the price of the wine increased, so did the participant's enjoyment of the
wine. Not only did they say they enjoyed the wine more but their brain corroborated their feelings,
showing higher spikes in the regions associated with pleasure. Little did the study participants
realize, they were tasting the same wine each time. This study demonstrates how perception can form
a personal reality based on how a product is framed, even when there is little relationship with
objective quality.

The Anchoring Effect
Rarely can you walk into a clothing store without seeing signage for “30% off,” “buy-one-get-one
free,” and other sales and deals. In reality, these items are often marketed to maximize profits for the
business. Often, the same store will have similar but less expensive (yet non-discounted) products. I
recently visited a store that offered a package of three Jockey brand undershirts at a buy-one-get-one-
half-off discount for $29.50. After surveying other options, I noticed a package of five Fruit of the
Loom brand undershirts selling for $34. After some quick math, I discovered that the shirts not on sale
were actually cheaper per-shirt than the “discounted” brand’s package.
People often anchor to one piece of information when making a decision. I almost bought the shirts
on sale assuming that the one feature differentiating the two brands — the fact that one was on sale
and the other was not — was all I needed to consider.
The Endowed Progress Effect
Punch cards are often used by retailers to encourage repeat business. With each purchase, customers
get closer to receiving a free product or service. These cards are typically awarded empty and in
effect, customers start at zero percent complete. What would happen if retailers handed customers
punch cards with punches already given? Would people be more likely to take action if they had
already made some progress? An experiment sought to answer this very question.
[lxvi]
Two groups of customers were given punch cards awarding a free car wash once the cards were
fully punched. One group was given a blank punch card with 8 squares and the other given a punch
card with 10 squares but with two free punches. Both groups still had to purchase 8 car washes to
receive a free wash; however, the second group of customers — those that were given two free
punches — had a staggering 82 percent higher completion rate. The study demonstrates the endowed
progress effect, a phenomenon that increases motivation as people believe they are nearing a goal.
Sites such as LinkedIn and Facebook utilize this heuristic to encourage people to divulge more
information about themselves when completing their online profiles. On LinkedIn, every user starts
with some semblance of progress (figure 19). The next step is to “Improve Your Profile Strength” by
supplying additional information. As users complete each step, the meter incrementally shows the
user is advancing. Cleverly, LinkedIn’s completion bar jumpstarts the perception of progress and
does not include a numeric scale. For the new user, a proper LinkedIn profile does not seem so far
away. But even the “advanced” user still has additional steps she can take to inch toward the final
goal.
Figure 19
***
Most people remain unaware of how heuristics help us make split-second decisions multiple times
per day. Psychologists believe there are hundreds of cognitive biases that influence our behaviors and
the four discussed here are just a few examples.
[lxvii] For product designers building habit-forming
technology, understanding and leveraging these methods for boosting motivation and ability can prove
highly impactful.

Stephen Anderson, author of Seductive Interaction Design, created a tool called Mental Notes to
help designers build better products through heuristics.
[lxviii] Each of the cards in his deck of 50 contains
a brief description of a cognitive bias and is intended to spark product team conversations around
how they might utilize the principle. For example, team members might ask themselves how they
could utilize the endowed progress effect or the scarcity effect to increase the likelihood of a desired
user behavior.
In this chapter, we discovered how to take users from trigger to action. We discussed how
cognitive biases influence behavior and how by designing the simplest action in anticipation of a
reward, product makers can advance users to the next phase of the Hook Model.
Now that users have passed through the first two phases, it is time to give them what they came for
— the reward that scratches their itch. But what is it exactly that users want? What keeps us coming
back time and again to habit-forming experiences and technologies? The answer to what we’re all
searching for is the topic of the next chapter.
***
Remember and Share
- Action is the second step in The Hook.
- The action is the simplest behavior in anticipation of reward.
- As described by the Dr. BJ Fogg’s Behavior Model:
- For any behavior to occur, a trigger must be present at the same time as the user has sufficient
ability and motivation to take action.
- To increase the desired behavior, ensure a clear trigger is present, then increase ability by
making the action easier to do, and finally align with the right motivator.
- Every behavior is driven by one of three Core Motivators: seeking pleasure or avoiding pain,
seeking hope and avoiding fear, seeking social acceptance while avoiding social rejection.
- Ability is influenced by the six factors of time, money, physical effort, brain cycles, social
deviance, and non-routineness. Ability is dependent on users and their context at that moment.
- Heuristics are cognitive shortcuts we take to make quick decisions. Product designers can
utilize many of the hundreds of heuristics to increase the likelihood of their desired action.
***
Do This Now
Refer to the answers you came up with in the last “Do This Now” section to complete the following
exercises:
- Walk through the path your users would take to use your product or service, beginning from
the time they feel their internal trigger to the point where they receive their expected outcome.
How many steps does it take before users obtain the reward they came for? How does this process
compare with the simplicity of some of the examples described in this chapter? How does it
compare with competing products and services?
- Which resources are limiting your users’ ability to accomplish the tasks that will become
habits?
- Time
- Money
- Physical effort
- Brain cycles (too confusing)

- Social deviance (outside the norm)
- Non-routine (too new)
- Brainstorm three testable ways to make the intended tasks easier to complete.
-  Consider how you might apply heuristics to make habit-forming actions more likely.


4. VARIABLE REWARD
 
Ultimately, all businesses help users achieve an objective. As we learned in the previous chapter,
reducing the steps needed to complete the intended outcome increases the likelihood of that outcome.
But to keep users engaged, products need to deliver on their promises. To form the learned
associations we discussed in the chapter on triggers, users must come to depend on the product as a
reliable solution to their problem — the salve for the itch they came to scratch.
The third step in the Hook Model is the Variable Reward phase. In this phase, you reward your
users by solving a problem, reinforcing their motivation for the action taken in the previous phase.
But to understand why rewards — and variable rewards in particular — are so powerful, we must
first take a trip deep inside the brain.
Understanding Rewards
In the 1940s, two researchers named James Olds and Peter Milner accidentally discovered how a
special area of the brain is the source of our cravings. The researchers implanted electrodes in the
brains of lab mice that enabled the mice to give themselves tiny electric shocks to a small area of the
brain called the nucleus accumbens.
[lxix] The mice quickly became hooked on the sensation.
Olds and Milner demonstrated that the lab mice would forgo food, water, and even run across a
painful electrified grid for the opportunity to continue pressing the lever that administered the shocks.
A few years later, other researchers tested the human response to self-administered stimulus in the
same area of the brain. The results were just as dramatic as in the mouse trial — subjects wanted to
do nothing but press the brain-stimulating button. Even when the machine was turned off, people
continued pressing the button. Researchers even had to forcibly take the devices from subjects who
refused to relinquish them.
Given the responses they had earlier demonstrated from lab animals, Olds and Milner concluded
that they had discovered the brain’s pleasure center. In fact, we now know other things that feel good
also activate the same neural region. Sex, delicious food, a bargain, and even our digital devices all
tap into this deep recess of the brain, providing the impetus for many of our behaviors.
However, more recent research has shown that Olds and Milner’s experiments were not
stimulating pleasure per se. Stanford Professor Brian Knutson, conducted a study exploring blood
flow in the brains of people wagering while inside of an fMRI machine.
[lxx] The test subjects played a
gambling game while Knutson and his team looked at which areas of their brains became more active.
The startling results showed that the nucleus accumbens was not activating when the reward (in this
case a monetary payout) was received, but rather, in anticipation of it.
The study revealed that what draws us to act is not the sensation we receive from the reward itself,
but the need to alleviate the craving for that reward. The stress of desire in the brain appears to
compel us, just as it did in Olds’ and Milner’s lab mouse experiments.
Understanding Variability
If you’ve never watched a YouTube video of a baby’s first encounter with a dog, it’s worth doing.
Not only are these videos incredibly cute, but they help demonstrate something important about our
mental wiring.
At first, the expression on the baby’s face seems to ask, “What is this hairy monster doing in my
house? Will it hurt me? What will it do next?” The child is filled with curiosity, uncertain if this

creature might cause harm. But soon the child figures out Rover is not a threat. What follows is an
explosion of infectious giggles. Researchers believe laughter may in fact be a release valve when we
experience the discomfort and excitement of uncertainty, but without fear of harm.
[lxxi]
What we do not see in the videos is what happens over time. A few years later, what was once
thrilling about Rover, no longer holds the child’s attention in the same way. The child has learned to
predict the dog’s behavior and no longer finds the pup quite as entertaining. By now, the child’s mind
is occupied with dump trucks, fire engines, bicycles, and new toys that stimulate the senses — until
they too become predictable. Without variability, we are like children in that once we figure out what
will happen next, we become less excited by the experience. The same rules that apply to puppies
also apply to products. To hold our attention, products must have an ongoing degree of novelty.
Our brains have evolved over millennia to help us figure out how things work. Once we understand
causal relationships, we retain that information in memory. Our habits are simply the brain's ability to
quickly retrieve the appropriate behavioral response to a routine or process we have already learned.
Habits help us conserve our attention for other things while we go about the tasks we perform with
little or no conscious thought.
However, when something breaks the cause-and-effect pattern we've come to expect — when we
encounter something outside the norm — we suddenly become aware of it again.
[lxxii] Novelty sparks
our interest, makes us pay attention, and — like a baby encountering a friendly dog for the first time
— we seem to love it.
Rewards of the Tribe, Hunt, and Self
In the 1950s, psychologist B.F. Skinner conducted experiments to understand how variability
impacted animal behavior.
[lxxiii] First, Skinner placed pigeons inside a box rigged to deliver a food
pellet to the birds every time they pressed a lever. Similar to Olds’ and Milner’s lab mice, the
pigeons learned the cause-and-effect relationship between pressing the lever and receiving the food.
In the next part of the experiment, Skinner added variability. Instead of providing a pellet every
time a pigeon tapped the lever, the machine discharged food after a random number of taps.
Sometimes the lever would dispense food, sometimes not. Skinner revealed that the intermittent
reward dramatically increased the number of times the pigeons tapped the lever. Adding variability
increased the frequency of the pigeons completing the intended action.
Skinner’s pigeons tell us a great deal about what helps drive our own behaviors. More recent
experiments reveal that variability increases activity in the nucleus accumbens and spikes levels of
the neurotransmitter dopamine, driving our hungry search for rewards.
[lxxiv] Researchers observed
increased dopamine levels in the nucleus accumbens in experiments involving monetary rewards as
well as in a study of heterosexual men viewing images of attractive women’s faces.
[lxxv]
Variable rewards can be found in all sorts of products and experiences that hold our attention.
They fuel our drive to check email, browse the web, or bargain-shop. I propose that variable rewards
come in three types: Tribe, hunt and self (figure 20). Habit-forming products utilize one or more of
these variable reward types.

Figure 20
 
Rewards of the Tribe
We are a species that depends on each other. Rewards of the tribe, or social rewards, are driven by
our connectedness with other people. Our brains are adapted to seek rewards that make us feel
accepted, attractive, important, and included. Many of our institutions and industries are built around
this need for social reinforcement. From civic and religious groups to spectator sports and
“watercooler” television shows, the need to feel social connectedness shapes our values and drives
much of how we spend our time.
It is no surprise that social media has exploded in popularity. Facebook, Twitter, Pinterest, and
several other sites collectively provide over a billion people with powerful social rewards on a
variable schedule. With every post, tweet, or pin, users anticipate social validation. Rewards of the
tribe keep users coming back, wanting more.
Sites that leverage tribal rewards benefit from what psychologist Albert Bandura called “social
learning theory.”
[lxxvi] Bandura studied the power of modeling and ascribed special powers to our
ability to learn from others. In particular, Bandura showed that people who observe someone being
rewarded for a particular behavior are more likely to alter their own beliefs and subsequent actions.
Notably, Bandura also showed that this technique works particularly well when people observe the
behavior of people most like themselves, or those who are slightly more experienced (and, therefore,
role models).
[lxxvii] This is exactly the kind of targeted demographic and interest-level segmentation that
social media companies such as Facebook and industry-specific sites such as Stack Overflow
selectively apply.
Here are some online examples of rewards of the tribe:
Facebook
Facebook provides numerous examples of variable social rewards. Logging-in reveals an endless
stream of content friends have shared, comments from others, and running tallies of how many people
have “liked” something (figure 21). The uncertainty of what users will find each time they visit the
site creates the intrigue needed to pull them back again.
While variable content gets users to keep searching for interesting tidbits in their Newsfeeds, a
click of the “Like” button provides a variable reward for the content’s creators. “Likes” and

comments offer tribal validation for those who shared the content, and provide variable rewards that
motivate them to continue posting.
Figure 21
 
Stack Overflow
Stack Overflow is the world’s largest question-and-answer site for software developers. As with
other user-generated content sites such as Quora, Wikipedia, and YouTube, all of Stack Overflow’s
content is created voluntarily by people who use the site. A staggering 5,000 answers to questions are
generated per day by site members. Many of these responses provide detailed, highly technical and
time-consuming answers. But why do so many people spend so much time doing all this work for
free? What motivates them to invest the effort into what others may see as the burdensome task of
writing technical documentation?
Stack Overflow devotees write responses in anticipation of rewards of the tribe. Each time a user
submits an answer, other members have the opportunity to vote the response up or down. The best
responses percolate upwards, accumulating points for their authors (figure 22). When they reach
certain point levels, members earn badges, which confer special status and privileges. Of course, the
process of accumulating upvotes (and, therefore, points and badges) is highly variable — no one
knows how many they will receive from the community when responding to a question. 

Figure 22
Stack Overflow works because, like all of us, software engineers find satisfaction in contributing
to a community they care about; and the element of variability turns a seemingly mundane task into an
engaging, game-like experience. But on Stack Overflow, points are not just an empty game mechanic,
they confer special value by representing how much someone has contributed to their tribe. Users
enjoy the feeling of helping their fellow programmers and earning the respect of people whose
opinions they value.
League of Legends
League of Legends, a popular computer game, launched in 2009 and quickly achieved tremendous
success. But soon after its launch, the game’s owners found they had a serious problem: The online
video game was filled with “trolls” — people who enjoyed bullying other players while being
protected by the anonymity the game provides. Soon, League of Legends earned a nasty reputation for
having an “unforgiving — even abusive — community.”
[lxxviii] A leading industry publication wrote,
“League of Legends has become well known for at least two things: proving the power of the free-to-
play model in the West and a vicious player community.”
[lxxix]
To combat the trolls, the game creators designed a reward system leveraging Bandura’s social
learning theory, which they called Honor Points (figure 23). The system gave players the ability to
award points for particularly sportsmanlike conduct worthy of recognition. These virtual kudos
encouraged positive behavior and helped the best and most cooperative players to stand out in the
community. The number of points earned was highly variable and could only be conferred by other
players. Honor Points soon became a coveted marker of tribe-conferred status and helped weed out
trolls by signaling to others which players should be avoided.

Figure 23
Rewards of the Hunt
For years, scientists have tried to answer a central question of human evolution: How did early
humans hunt for food? Most evolutionary biologists agree that consuming animal protein was a
significant milestone that led to better nutrition and, ultimately, bigger brains but the tactical details of
the hunt remain hazy.
[lxxx] We know our ancestors handcrafted spears and arrows for hunting, but
evidence shows that these weapons were only invented 500,000 years ago,
[lxxxi] whereas we’ve been
eating meat for over 2 million years.
[lxxxii] How then, did we hunt during the first 75 percent of our
existence?
According to Harvard evolutionary biologist Daniel Lieberman, we chased down our dinner. Early
humans killed animals using a technique known as “persistence hunting,” a practice still common
among today’s few remaining pre-agrarian societies. One of these groups, the San people of Southern
Africa, hunt for kudu, a large deer-like animal, using a technique similar to the way Lieberman
believes humans hunted for the vast majority of our species’ history. The way we evolved to hunt
wild game may help explain why we find ourselves compelled to use certain products today.
In Africa, the chase begins when a group of San hunters separate a large kudu bull from the herd.
The animal’s heavy antlers slows him down, making him less agile than the female kudus. Once the
animal is isolated from the pack, a single San hunter begins the hunt, keeping a steady pace as the
animal leaps ahead in fear. At first, it appears the man will never catch up to the bounding beast. At
times he struggles to keep the animal in sight through the dry brush.
But the hunter knows he can use the animal’s weaknesses to his advantage. The powerful kudu is
much faster in short sprints, but the kudu’s skin is covered with fur and can not dissipate heat like the
runner’s skin can. According to Lieberman, “Quadrupeds can not pant and gallop at the same
time.”
[lxxxiii] So while the kudu must stop to catch his breath, the hunter begins closing in, not to catch it
but to run it to exhaustion.
After being tracked for a sweltering eight hours under the African sun, the beast is finally ready to
give up, collapsing in surrender with barely a struggle. The meager hundred-pound San hunter outlasts
the powerful 500 pound beast with little more than his persistence and the biomechanical gifts
evolution has given him. The hunter swiftly and ceremoniously kills his prize, piercing a vein in the
animal’s neck so that he can feed his children and his tribe.
By running on two feet and bereft of the body hair typical of other primates, our species gained a
massive advantage over larger mammals. Our ability to maintain steady pursuit gave us the capacity
to hunt large prehistoric game. But persistence hunting was not only made possible because of our
bodies; changes in our brains also played a significant role.

During the chase, the runner is driven by the pursuit itself; and this same mental hardwiring also
provides clues into the source of our insatiable desires today. The dogged determination that keeps
San hunters chasing kudu is the same mechanism that keeps us wanting and buying. Although it is a
long way from bushmen to businessmen, the mental processes of the hunt remain largely the same.
The search for resources defines the next type of variable reward — the rewards of hunt. The need
to acquire physical objects, such as food and other supplies that aid our survival, is part of our
brain’s operating system. But where we once hunted for food, today we hunt for other things. In
modern society, food can be bought with cash, and more recently by extension, information translates
into money.
Rewards of the hunt existed long before the advent of computers. But today we find numerous
examples of variable rewards associated with the pursuit of resources and information that compel us
with the same determination as the San hunter chasing his prey.
Here are a few examples of products that create habits by leveraging rewards of the hunt:
 
Machine Gambling
Most people know that gambling benefits the casino or broker far more than the players. As the old
adage says, “the house always wins.” Yet despite this knowledge, the multi-billion dollar gambling
industry continues to thrive.
Slot machines provide a classic example of variable rewards of the hunt. Gamblers plunk $1
billion per day into slot machines in American casinos, which is a testament to the machines’ power
to compel players.
[lxxxiv] By awarding money in random intervals, games of chance entice players with
the prospect of a jackpot. Of course, winning is entirely outside the gambler’s control — yet the
pursuit can be intoxicating.
Twitter
The “feed” has become a social staple of many online products. The stream of limitless information
displayed in a scrolling interface makes for a compelling reward of the hunt. The Twitter timeline, for
example, is filled with a mix of both mundane and relevant content. This variety creates an enticingly
unpredictable user experience. On occasion a user might find a particularly interesting piece of news,
while other times, she won’t. But to keep hunting for more information, all that is needed is a flick of
the finger or scroll of a mouse. Users scroll and scroll and scroll to search for variable rewards in
the form of relevant tweets (figure 24).

Figure 24
Pinterest
Pinterest, a company that has grown to reach over 50 million monthly users worldwide, also employs
a feed, but with a visual twist.
[lxxxv] The online pinboarding site is a virtual smorgasbord of objects of
desire. The site is curated by its community of users who ensure that a high degree of intriguing
content appears on each page.
Pinterest users never know what they will find on the site. To keep them searching and scrolling,
the company employs an unusual design. As the user scrolls to the bottom of the page, some images
appear to be cut-off. Often, images appear out of view below the browser fold. However, these
images offer a glimpse of what's ahead, even if just barely visible. To relieve their curiosity, all users
have to do is scroll to reveal the full picture (figure 25). As more images load on the page, the
endless search for variable rewards of the hunt continues.
Figure 25
 
Rewards of the Self
Finally, there are the variable rewards we seek for a more personal form of gratification. We are
driven to conquer obstacles, even if just for the satisfaction of doing so. Pursuing a task to completion
can influence people to continue all sorts of behaviors.
[lxxxvi] Surprisingly, we even pursue these
rewards when we don’t outwardly appear to enjoy them. For example, watching someone investing

countless hours into completing a tabletop puzzle can reveal frustrated face contortions and even
sounds of muttered profanity. Although puzzles offer no prize other than the satisfaction of
completion, for some the painstaking search for the right pieces can be a wonderfully mesmerizing
struggle.
The rewards of the self are fueled by “intrinsic motivation” as highlighted by the work of Edward
Deci and Richard Ryan.
[lxxxvii] Their self-determination theory espouses that people desire, among other
things, to gain a sense of competency. Adding an element of mystery to this goal makes the pursuit all
the more enticing.
The experiences below offer examples of variable rewards of the self:
Video Games
Rewards of the self are a defining component in video games, as players seek to master the skills
needed to pursue their quest. Leveling up, unlocking special powers, and other game mechanics fulfill
a player's desire for competency by showing progression and completion.
For example, advancing a character through the popular online game World of Warcraft unlocks
new abilities for the player (figure 26). The thirst to acquire advanced weaponry, visit uncharted
lands, and improve their characters’ scores motivates players to invest more hours in the game.
Figure 26
Email
You do not have to be a hard-core video gamer to be heavily influenced by game-like experiences.
The humble email system provides an example of how the search for mastery, completion, and
competence moves users to habitual, sometimes mindless, actions. Have you ever caught yourself
checking your email for no particular reason? Perhaps you unconsciously decided to open it to see
what messages might be waiting for you. For many, the number of unread messages represents a sort
of goal to be completed.
But to feel rewarded, the user must have a sense of accomplishment. Mailbox, an email application
acquired by Dropbox in 2013 for a rumored $100 million, aims to solve the frustration of fighting
what feels like a losing inbox battle.
[lxxxviii] Mailbox cleverly segments emails into sorted folders to

increase the frequency of users achieving “inbox zero” — a near-mystical state of having no unread
emails (figure 27). Of course, some of the folder sorting is done through digital sleight-of-hand by
pushing some low priority emails out of sight, and then having them reappear at a later date. But by
giving users the sense that they are processing their inbox more efficiently, Mailbox delivers
something other email clients do not — a feeling of completion and mastery.
Figure 27
 
Codecademy
Learning to program is not easy. Software engineers take months, if not years, of diligent hard work
before they have the confidence and skill to write useful code. Many people attempt to learn how to
write software, only to give up, frustrated at the tedious process of learning a new computer language.
Codecademy seeks to make learning to write code more fun and rewarding. The site offers step-by-
step instructions for building a web app, animation, and even a browser-based game. The interactive
lessons deliver immediate feedback, in contrast to traditional methods of learning to code by writing
whole programs. At Codecademy, users can enter a single correct function and the code works or
doesn’t, providing instant feedback.
Learning a new skill is often filled with errors but Codecademy uses the difficulty to its advantage.
There is a constant element of the unknown when it comes to completing the task at hand and like a
game, users receive variable rewards as they learn — sometimes they succeed, sometimes they fail.
But as their competency level improves, users work to advance through levels, mastering the
curriculum. Codecademy’s symbols of progression and instantaneous variable feedback tap into
rewards of the self, turning a difficult path into an engaging challenge (figure 28).

Figure 28
***
Important Considerations for Designing Reward Systems
Variable Rewards Are Not a Free Pass
In May 2007, a site called Mahalo.com was born. A flagship feature of the new site was a question-
and-answer forum known as Mahalo Answers. Unlike previous Q&A sites, Mahalo utilized a special
incentive to get users to ask and answer questions.
First, people who submitted a question would offer a bounty in the form of a virtual currency
known as “Mahalo Dollars.” Then, other users would contribute answers to the question and the best
response would receive the bounty, which could be exchanged for real money. By providing a
monetary reward, the Mahalo founders believed they could drive user engagement and form new
online user habits.
At first, Mahalo garnered significant attention and traffic. At its high point, 14.1 million users
worldwide visited the site monthly.
[lxxxix] But over time, users began to lose interest. Although the
payout of the bounties were variable, somehow users did not find the monetary rewards enticing
enough.
But as Mahalo struggled to retain users, another Q&A site began to boom. Quora, launched in 2010
by two former Facebook employees, quickly grew in popularity. Unlike Mahalo, Quora did not offer
a single cent to anyone answering user questions. Why, then, have users stayed highly engaged with
Quora, but not with Mahalo, despite its variable monetary rewards?
In Mahalo’s case, executives assumed that paying users would drive repeat engagement with the
site. After all, people like money, right? Unfortunately, Mahalo had an incomplete understanding of its
users’ drivers.
Ultimately, the company found that people did not want to use a Q&A site to make money. If the
trigger was a desire for monetary rewards, the user was better off spending their time earning an
hourly wage. And if the payouts were meant to take the form of a game, like a slot machine, then the
rewards came far too infrequently and were too small to matter.
However, Quora demonstrated that social rewards and the variable reinforcement of recognition

from peers proved to be much more frequent and salient motivators. Quora instituted an upvoting
system that reports user satisfaction with answers and provides a steady stream of social feedback.
Quora’s social rewards have proven more attractive than Mahalo’s monetary rewards.
Only by understanding what truly matters to users can a company correctly match the right variable
reward to their intended behavior.
Recently, “gamification” — defined as the use of game-like elements in non-gaming environments
— has been used with varying success. Points, badges, and leaderboards can prove effective, but
only if they scratch the user’s itch. When there is a mismatch between the customer’s problem and the
company’s assumed solution, no amount of gamification will help spur engagement. Likewise, if the
user has no ongoing itch at all — say, no need to return repeatedly to a site that lacks any value
beyond the initial visit — gamification will fail because of a lack of inherent interest in the product or
service offered. In other words, gamification is not a one-size-fits-all solution for driving user
engagement.
Variable rewards are not magic fairy dust that a product designer can sprinkle onto a product to
make it instantly more attractive. Rewards must fit into the narrative of why the product is used and
align with the user's internal triggers and motivations.
Maintain a Sense of Autonomy
Quora found success by connecting the right reward to the intended behavior of asking and answering
questions. But in August 2012, the company committed a very public blunder — one that illustrates
another important consideration when using variable rewards.
In an effort to increase user engagement, Quora introduced a new feature called “views,” which
revealed the real identity of people visiting a particular question or answer. For users, the feedback
of knowing who was seeing content they added to the site proved very intriguing. Users could now
know, for example, when a celebrity or prominent venture capital investor viewed something they
created.  
However, the feature ultimately backfired. Quora automatically opted users into the new feature
without alerting them that their browsing history on the site would be exposed to others. In an instant,
users lost their treasured anonymity when asking, answering, or simply viewing Quora questions that
were personal, awkward, or intimate.
[xc] The move sparked a user revolt and Quora reversed course a
few weeks later, making the feature explicitly opt-in.
[xci]
In the case of Quora, the change felt forced and bordered on coercion. While influencing behavior
can be a part of good product design, heavy-handed efforts can have adverse consequences and risk
losing users’ trust.
We’ll address the morality of manipulation in a later chapter — but aside from the ethical
considerations, there is an important point regarding the psychological role of autonomy and how it
can impact user engagement.
As part of a French study, researchers wanted to know if they could influence how much money
people handed to a total stranger asking for bus fare by using just a few specially encoded words.
They discovered a technique so simple and effective it doubled the amount people gave.
The turn of phrase has not only proven to increase how much bus fare people give, but has also
been effective in boosting charitable donations and participation in voluntary surveys. In fact, a recent
meta-analysis of 42 studies involving over 22,000 participants concluded that these few words,
placed at the end of a request, are a highly-effective way to gain compliance, doubling the likelihood
of people saying “yes.”
[xcii]

The magic words the researchers discovered? The phrase, “but you are free to accept or refuse.”
The “but you are free” technique demonstrates how we are more likely to be persuaded when our
ability to choose is reaffirmed. Not only was the effect observed during face-to-face interactions, but
also over email. Although the research did not directly look at how products and services might use
the technique, the study provides an important insight into how companies maintain or lose the user’s
attention.
Why does reminding people of their freedom to choose, as demonstrated in the French bus fare
study, prove so effective?
The researchers believe the phrase “but you are free” disarms our instinctive rejection of being
told what to do. If you have ever grumbled at your mother telling you to put on a coat or felt your
blood pressure rise when your boss micro-manages you, you have experienced what psychologists
call “reactance,” the hair-trigger response to threats to your autonomy.
However, when a request is coupled with an affirmation of the right to choose, reactance is kept at
bay. But can the principles of autonomy and reactance carry over into the way products change user
behavior and drive the formation of new user habits? Here are two examples to make the case that
they do, but of course, you are free to make up your mind for yourself.
Take, for example, establishing the habit of better nutrition, a common goal for many Americans.
Searching in the Apple App Store for the word “diet” returns 3,235 apps, all promising to help users
shed extra pounds. The first app in the long list is MyFitnessPal, whose iOS app is rated by over
350,000 people.
A year ago when I decided to lose a few pounds, I installed the app and gave it a try. MyFitnessPal
is simple enough to use. The app asked me to log what I ate and presented me with a calorie score
based on my weight loss goal.
For a few days, I stuck with the program and diligently input information about everything I ate.
Had I been a person who logs food with pen and paper, MyFitnessPal would have been a welcome
improvement.
However, I was not a calorie tracker prior to using MyFitnessPal and although using the app was
novel at first, it soon became a drag. Keeping a food diary was not part of my daily routine and was
not something I came to the app wanting to do. I wanted to lose weight and the app was telling me
how to do it with its strict method of tracking calories in and calories out. Unfortunately, I soon found
that forgetting to enter a meal made it impossible to get back on the program – the rest of my day was
a nutritional wash.
Soon, I began to feel obligated to confess my mealtime transgressions to my phone. MyFitnessPal
became MyFitnessPain. Yes, I had chosen to install the app at first, but despite my best intentions, my
motivation faded and using the app became a chore. Adopting a weird new behavior — calorie
tracking, in my case — felt like something I had to do, not something I wanted to do. My only options
were to comply or quit. So I quit.
On the other hand Fitocracy, another health app, approaches behavior change very differently. The
goal of the app is similar to its competitors — to help people establish better diet and exercise
routines. However, it leverages familiar behaviors users want to do, instead of have to do.
At first, the Fitocracy experience is similar to other health apps, encouraging new members to track
their food consumption and exercise. But where Fitocracy differentiates itself is in its recognition that
most users will quickly fall off the wagon, just as I had with MyFitnessPal, unless the app taps into
existing autonomous behavior.
Before my reactance alarm went off, I started receiving kudos from other members of the site after

entering my very first run. Curious to know who was sending the virtual encouragement, I logged in.
There, I immediately saw a question from “mrosplock5,” a woman looking for advice on what to do
about knee pain from running. Having experienced similar trouble several years back, I left a quick
reply: “Running barefoot (or with minimalist shoes) eliminated my knee pains. Strange but true!”
I have not used Fitocracy for long, but it is easy to see how someone could get hooked. Fitocracy is
first and foremost an online community. The app roped me in by closely mimicking real-world gym
jabber among friends. The ritual of connecting with like-minded people existed long before
Fitocracy, and the company leverages this behavior by making it easier and more rewarding to share
encouragement, exchange advice, and receive praise. In fact, a recent study found social factors were
the most important reasons people used the service and recommended it to others.
[xciii]
Social acceptance is something we all crave, and Fitocracy leverages the universal need for
connection as an on-ramp to fitness, making new tools and features available to users as they develop
new habits. The choice for the Fitocracy user is therefore between the old way of doing an existing
behavior and the company’s tailored solution for easing the user into healthy new habits.
To be fair, MyFitnessPal also has social features intended to keep members engaged. However, as
opposed to Fitocracy, the benefits of interacting with the community come much later in the user
experience, if ever.
Clearly, it is too early to tell which among the multitudes of new wellness apps and products will
emerge victorious, but the fact remains that the most successful consumer technologies — those that
have altered the daily behaviors of hundreds of millions of people — are the ones that nobody makes
us use. Perhaps part of the appeal of sneaking in a few minutes on Facebook or checking scores on
ESPN.com is our access to a moment of pure autonomy – an escape from being told what to do by
bosses and co-workers.
Unfortunately, too many companies build their products betting users will do what they make them
do instead of letting them do what they want to do. Companies fail to change user behaviors because
they do not make their services enjoyable for its own sake, often asking users to learn new, unfamiliar
actions instead of making old routines easier.
Companies that successfully change behaviors present users with an implicit choice between their
old way of doing things and a new, more convenient way to fulfill existing needs. By maintaining the
users’ freedom to choose, products can facilitate the adoption of new habits and change behavior for
good.
Whether coerced into doing something we did not intend, as was the case when Quora opted-in all
users to its “views” feature, or feeling forced to adopt a strange new calorie counting behavior on
MyFitnessPal, people often feel constrained by threats to their autonomy and rebel. To change
behavior, products must ensure the users feel in control. People must want to use the service, not feel
they have to.
Beware of Finite Variability
In 2008, a television series called Breaking Bad began receiving unprecedented critical and popular
acclaim. The show followed the life of Walter White, a high school chemistry teacher who transforms
himself into a crystal meth-cooking drug lord. As the body count on the show piled up season after
season, so did its viewership.
[xciv] The first episode of the final season in 2013 attracted 5.9 million
viewers and by the end of the series Guinness World Records dubbed it the highest-rated TV series
of all time.
[xcv] Although Breaking Bad owes a great deal of its success to its talented cast and crew,
fundamentally the program utilized a simple formula to keep people tuning in.

At the heart of every episode — and also across each season’s narrative arc — is a problem the
characters must resolve. For example, during an episode in the first season, Walter White must find a
way to dispose of the bodies of two rival drug dealers. Challenges prevent resolution of the conflict
and suspense is created as the audience waits to find out how the storyline ends. In this particular
episode, White discovers one of the drug dealers is still alive and is faced with the dilemma of
having to kill someone he thought was already dead. Invariably, each episode’s central conflict is
resolved near the end of the show, at which time a new challenge arises to pique the viewer’s
curiosity. By design, the only way to know how Walter gets out of the mess he is in at the end of the
latest episode is to watch the next episode.    
The cycle of conflict, mystery and resolution is as old as storytelling itself, and at the heart of every
good tale is variability. The unknown is fascinating and strong stories hold our attention by waiting to
reveal what happens next. In a phenomenon called “experience-taking,” researchers have shown that
people who read a story about a character actually feel what the protagonist is feeling.
[xcvi] As we step
into the character’s shoes we experience his or her motivations — including the search for rewards of
the tribe, hunt and self. We empathize with characters because they are driven by the same things that
drive us.
But if the search to resolve uncertainty is such a powerful tool of engagement, why do we
eventually lose interest in the things that once riveted us? Many people have experienced the intense
focus of being hooked on a TV series, a great book, a new video game or even the latest gadget. Yet,
most of us lose interest in a few days or week’s time. Why does the power of variable rewards seem
to fade away?
Perhaps no company in recent memory epitomizes the mercurial nature of variable rewards quite
like Zynga, makers of the hit Facebook game FarmVille. In 2009, FarmVille became an unmissable
part of the global zeitgeist. The game smashed records as it quickly reached 83.8 million monthly
active users by leveraging the Facebook platform to acquire new players.
[xcvii] In 2010, as “farmers”
tended their digital crops — while paying real money for virtual goods and levels — the company
generated more than $36 million in revenue.
[xcviii]
The company seemed invincible and set a course for growth by cloning its FarmVille success into
a franchise. Zynga soon released CityVille, ChefVille, FrontierVille, and several more “-Ville” titles
using familiar game mechanics in the hope that people would enjoy them as voraciously as they had
FarmVille. By March 2012, Zynga’s stock was flying high and the company was valued at over $10
billion.
But by November of that same year, the stock was down over 80 percent. It turned out that Zynga’s
new games were not really new at all. The company had simply re-skinned FarmVille, and soon
players had lost interest and investors followed suit. What was once novel and intriguing became rote
and boring. The “Villes” had lost their variability, and with it, their viability.
As the Zynga story demonstrates, an element of mystery is an important component of continued
user interest.  Online games like FarmVille suffer from what I call “finite variability” — an
experience that becomes predictable after use. While Breaking Bad built suspense over time as the
audience wondered how the series would end, eventually interest in the show would wane when it
finally concluded. The series enthralled viewers with each new episode, but now that it is all over,
how many people who saw it once will watch it again? With the plot lines known and the central
mysteries revealed, the show just won’t seem as interesting the second time around. Perhaps the show
might resurrect interest with a new episode in the future, but viewership for old episodes people have
already seen will never peak as it did when they were new. Experiences with finite variability

become less engaging because they eventually become predictable.
Businesses with finite variability are not inferior per se, they just operate under different
constraints. They must constantly churn out new content and experiences to cater to their consumers’
insatiable desire for novelty. It is no coincidence that both Hollywood and the video gaming industry
operate under what is called the “studio model,” whereby a deep-pocketed company provides
backing and distribution to a portfolio of movies or games, uncertain which one will become the next
mega-hit.
This is in contrast with companies making products exhibiting “infinite variability” — experiences
that maintain user interest by sustaining variability with use. For example, games played to
completion offer finite variability while those played with others people have higher degrees of
infinite variability because the players themselves alter the game-play throughout. World of Warcraft,
the world's most popular massively multiplayer online role-playing game, still captures the attention
of more than 10 million active users eight years after its first release.
[xcix] While FarmVille is played
mostly in solitude, World of Warcraft is played with teams and it is the hard-to-predict behavior of
other people that keeps the game interesting.
While content consumption, like watching a TV show, is an example of finite variability, content
creation is infinitely variable. Sites like Dribbble, a platform for designers and artists to showcase
their work, exemplify the longer-lasting engagement that comes from infinite variability. On the site,
contributors share their designs in search of feedback from other artists. As new trends and design
patterns change, so do Dribbble’s pages. The variety of what Dribbble users can create is limitless,
and the constantly changing site always offers new surprises.
Platforms like YouTube, Facebook, Pinterest and Twitter all leverage user-generated content to
provide visitors with a never-ending stream of newness. Of course, even sites utilizing infinite
variability are not guaranteed to hold onto users forever. Eventually — to borrow from Michael
Lewis’s title — the “new, new thing” comes along and consumers migrate to it for the reasons
discussed in earlier chapters. However, products utilizing infinite variability stand a better chance of
holding onto users’ attention, while those with finite variability must constantly reinvent themselves
just to keep pace.
Which Rewards Should You Offer?
Fundamentally, variable reward systems must satisfy users’ needs, while leaving them wanting to re-
engage. The most habit-forming products and services utilize one or more of the three variable
rewards types of tribe, hunt and self. In fact, many habit-forming products offer multiple variable
rewards.
Email, for example, utilizes all three variable reward types. What subconsciously compels us to
check our email? First, there is uncertainty surrounding who might be sending us a message. We have
a social obligation to respond to emails and a desire to be seen as agreeable (rewards of the tribe).
We may also be curious about what information is in the email. Perhaps something related to our
career or business awaits us? Checking email informs us of opportunities or threats to our material
possessions and livelihood (rewards of the hunt). Lastly, email is in itself a task — challenging us to
sort, categorize and act to eliminate unread messages. We are motivated by the uncertain nature of our
fluctuating email count and feel compelled to gain control of our inbox (rewards of the self).
As B.F. Skinner discovered over 50 years ago, variable rewards are a powerful inducement to
repeat actions. Understanding what moves users to return to habit-forming products gives designers
an opportunity to build products that align with their interests.

However, simply giving users what they want is not enough to create a habit-forming product. The
feedback loop of the first three steps of the hook — trigger, action and variable reward — still
misses a final critical phase. In the next chapter, we will learn how getting people to invest their time,
effort, or social equity in your product is a requirement for repeat use.
***
Remember and Share
- Variable Reward is the third phase of the Hook Model, and there are three types of variable
rewards: tribe, hunt and self.
- Rewards of the tribe is the search for social rewards fueled by connectedness with other
people.
- Rewards of the hunt is the search for material resources and information.
- Rewards of the self is the search for intrinsic rewards of mastery, competence, and
completion.
- When our autonomy is threatened, we feel constrained by our lack of choices and often rebel
against doing a new behavior. Psychologists call this “reactance.” Maintaining a sense of user
autonomy is a requirement for repeat engagement.
- Experiences with finite variability become increasingly predictable with use and lose their
appeal over time. Experiences that maintain user interest by sustaining variability with use exhibit
infinite variability.
- Variable rewards must satisfy users’ needs, while leaving them wanting to re-engage with the
product.
***
Do This Now
Refer to the answers you came up with in the last “Do This Now” section to complete the following
exercises:
- Speak with five of your customers in an open-ended interview to identify what they find
enjoyable or encouraging about using your product. Are there any moments of delight or surprise?
Is there anything they find particularly satisfying about using the product?
- Review the steps your customer takes to use your product or service habitually. What outcome
(reward) alleviates the user’s pain? Is the reward fulfilling, yet leaves the user wanting more?
- Brainstorm three ways your product might heighten users’ search for variable rewards using:
- Rewards of the Tribe - gratification from others
- Rewards of the Hunt - things, money or information
- Rewards of the Self - mastery, completion, competency or consistency


5. INVESTMENT
 
In the Trigger phase of the Hook Model, we discussed the importance of aligning with the right
internal triggers. Then, by utilizing external triggers, designers can prompt users with information for
the next intended action.
Next, in the Action phase, we learned about the role of the smallest actions taken in anticipation of
immediate rewards. And in the previous chapter on Rewards, we looked at how variable outcomes
influence repeat engagement. There is one last step in the Hook Model that is critical for building
habit-forming technologies. Before users create the mental associations that activate their automatic
behaviors, they must first invest in the product.
Changing Attitude
In chapter one, we learned about the tooth flossing study conducted at University College London,
where researchers determined that the frequency of a new behavior is a leading factor in forming a
new habit. The study also found that the second most important factor in habit formation is a change in
the participant’s attitude about the behavior. The finding is consistent with the Habit Zone graph
explained in chapter one, which illustrates that for a behavior to become routine it must occur with
significant frequency and perceived utility. Attitude change is the movement up the perceived utility
axis until the behavior enters the Habit Zone.
But in order for a change in attitude to occur, there must be a change in how users perceive the
behavior. In this chapter, we will start by exploring the mystery surrounding how small investments
change our perception, turning unfamiliar actions into everyday habits.
A psychological phenomenon known as the escalation of commitment has been shown to make our
brains do all sorts of funny things. The power of commitment makes some people play video games
until they keel over and die.
[c] It is used to influence people to give more to charity.
[ci] It has even been
used to coerce prisoners of war into switching allegiances.
[cii] The commitments we make have a
powerful effect on us and play an important role in the things we do, the products we buy, and the
habits we form.
The more users invest time and effort into a product or service, the more they value it. In fact, there
is ample evidence to suggest that our labor leads to love.
We Irrationally Value Our Efforts
In a 2011 study, Dan Ariely, Michael Norton and Daniel Mochon measured the effect of labor on how
people value things.
[ciii]
University students in America were given instructions to assemble an origami crane or frog. After
the exercise, students were asked to purchase their creation, bidding up to one dollar. Builders were
informed that a random number between 0 and 100 would be drawn. If it exceeded their reservation
price, the builders would return empty handed — but if it was equal to or less than the builder's bid,
they would pay their bid and keep the origami. Meanwhile, a separate group of students located in
another room, unaware of the identity of the builders, were asked to bid on their origami using the
same procedure. Similarly, a third independent group was asked to bid on expert-made origami under
the same criteria.
The results showed that those who made their own origami animals valued their creation five times

higher than the second group’s valuation, and nearly as high as the expert-made origami values (figure
29). In other words, those who invested labor associated greater value with their paper creations
simply because they had worked on them. Ariely calls this the “IKEA effect.”
Figure 29
IKEA, the world’s largest furniture retailer, sells affordable, ready-to-assemble household
furnishings. The Swedish company’s key innovation is its packaging process, which allows the
company to decrease labor costs, increase distribution efficiency, and better utilize the real estate in
its stores.
Unlike its competitors who sell pre-assembled merchandise, IKEA puts its customers to work. It
turns out there’s a hidden benefit to making users invest physical effort in assembling the product —
by asking customers to assemble their own furniture, Ariely believes they adopt an irrational love of
the furniture they built, just like the test subjects did in the origami experiments. Businesses that
leverage user effort confer higher value to their products simply because their users have put work
into them. The users have invested in the products through their labor.
We Seek to be Consistent with Our Past Behaviors
How much do past behaviors alter our future actions? We’d like to think we are free to choose to act
in any way we’d like — that our judgment is not clouded by our past actions. But in fact, studies
reveal that our past is an excellent predictor of our future.
A team of researchers asked a group of suburban residents to place large, unsightly signs in front of
their homes which read “Drive Carefully.”
[civ] Two groups were tested. In the first group, only 17
percent of the subjects agreed to the request, while 76 percent of those in the second group agreed to
post the ugly yard signs. What was the cause of this huge discrepancy? The groups were identical,
with the exception of one factor.
Those in the second group were approached two weeks prior to the yard sign request and asked to
place a much smaller, three-inch sign with the words, “Be a safe driver,” in their window. Nearly
everyone who was asked to place the smaller message agreed. When the researchers returned two
weeks later, a whopping majority of these residents willingly replaced the small sign with the large
one on their front lawns.
The homeowner’s greater willingness to place the large, obtrusive sign on their lawns after
agreeing to the smaller ones demonstrates the impact of our predilection for consistency with our past
behaviors. Little investments, such as placing a tiny sign in a window, can lead to big changes in
future behaviors.

We Avoid Cognitive Dissonance
In a classic Aesop’s Fable, a hungry fox encounters grapes hanging from a vine. The fox desperately
wants the grapes. But as hard as he may try, he can not reach them. Frustrated, the fox decides the
grapes must be sour and that he therefore would not want them anyway.
In the story, the fox comforts himself by changing his perception of the grapes because it is too
uncomfortable to reconcile the thought that the grapes are sweet and ready for the taking, and yet, he
can not have them. To reconcile these two conflicting ideas, the fox changes his perception of the
grapes and in the process relieves the pain of what psychologists call “cognitive dissonance.”
The irrational manipulation of the way one sees the world is not limited to fictional animals in
children’s stories. We humans do this as well.
Consider your reaction the first time you sipped a beer or tried spicy food. Was it tasty? Unlikely.
Our bodies are designed to reject alcohol and capsaicin, the compound that creates the sensation of
heat in spicy food. Our innate reaction to these acquired tastes is to reject them, and yet, we learn to
like them through repeated exposure. We see others enjoying them, try a little more, and over time
condition ourselves. To avoid the cognitive dissonance of not liking something in which others seem
to take so much pleasure, we slowly change our perception of the thing we once did not enjoy.
***
Together, the three tendencies described above influence our future actions. The more effort we put
into something, the more likely we are to value it. We are more likely to be consistent with our past
behaviors. And finally, we change our preferences to avoid cognitive dissonance.
In sum, our tendencies lead to a mental process known as rationalization whereby we change our
attitudes and beliefs to psychologically adapt. Rationalization helps us give reasons for our
behaviors, even when those reasons might have been designed by others.
At a 2010 industry conference, Jesse Schell, a renowned game designer and professor at Carnegie
Mellon University, articulated the peculiar train of thought some players exhibit online.
[cv] Schell
examined Mafia Wars, one of Zynga’s first breakout hits, which like FarmVille, attracted millions of
players.
“There's definitely a lot of psychology here, because if someone had said 'Hey, we're going to
make a text-based mafia game that's going to make over $100 million,' you'd say, 'I don't think you'll
do that.' Right?” Schell said, channeling the critics of the day who originally dismissed the free,
primarily text-based online game. But Zynga used its understanding of human psychology to build an
irresistible product at the time.
Mafia Wars was among the first games to utilize information about players’ Facebook friends. “It’s
not just a virtual world anymore. It’s your real friends.” Schell said. “And, you’re playing and it’s
kind of cool ... but then hey, hey my real friend is better than me. How can I remedy that? Well, I can
play a long time or I could just put $20 in — AHA! It’s even better if that $20 I put in validates
something I know is true, that I am greater than my college roommate, Steve.”
Schell went on, “Combine that with the psychological idea … of rationalization, that anything you
spend time on, you start to believe, ‘this must be worthwhile. Why? Because I’ve spent time on it!’
And therefore it must be worth me kicking in $20 because, look at the time I’ve spent on it. And now
that I’ve kicked in $20, it must be valuable because only an idiot would kick in $20 if it wasn’t.”
Schell’s description of the quirky process of Mafia Wars rationalization helps demonstrate the
strange logic of how we change our preferences. When players contemplate making a purchase, they
acknowledge it is unwise to spend money on something that is not good. And yet, just like the fox that

perceives the grapes as sour to reduce his frustration at not being able to reach them, players justify
their purchases to help convince themselves of something they want to be true — namely, that they are
not foolish. The only solution is to keep paying to keep playing.
The cognitive changes that lead to behavior change help power the shift in how we view the
products and services we use. But how are habit-forming products designed for user investment?
How can a product keep users committed to a service until it becomes a habit?
Bits of Work
In a standard feedback loop, the cue, action, and reward cycle can change our immediate behavior.
For example, a radar-equipped sign is an effective way to make drivers immediately slow down by
showing them their car’s speed relative to the posted speed limit.
But this pattern differs when it comes to how we form habits with products. The Hook Model is not
just a framework for changing one-time behaviors, it is a design pattern to create unprompted
engagement in order to connect the user’s problem to the designer’s solution. To form the associations
needed to create unprompted user engagement, something more than the three-step feedback loop is
required.
The last step of the Hook Model is the Investment Phase, the point at which users are asked to do a
bit of work. Here, users are prompted to put something of value into the system, which increases the
likelihood of them using the product and of successive passes through the hook cycle.
Unlike in the Action Phase of the Hook discussed in chapter three, investments are about the
anticipation of longer-term rewards, not immediate gratification.
In Twitter for example, the investment comes in the form of following another user. There is no
immediate reward for following someone, no stars or badges to affirm the action. Following is an
investment in the service, which increases the likelihood of the user checking Twitter in the future.
Also in contrast to the Action Phase, the Investment Phase increases friction. This certainly breaks
conventional thinking in the product design community that all user experiences should be as “easy”
(and effortless) as possible. This approach still generally holds true, as does my advice in the Action
Phase to make the intended actions as simple as possible. In the Investment Phase, however, asking
users to do a bit of work comes after users have received variable rewards, not before. The timing of
asking for user investment is critically important. By asking for the investment after the reward, the
company has an opportunity to leverage a central trait of human behavior.
In an experiment conducted by Stanford researchers, two groups of people were asked to complete
a task with the help of computers.
[cvi] The study participants were initially asked to use their assigned
computers to answer a series of questions. The computers provided to the first group were helpful
when answering participants’ questions, while those provided to the second group were programmed
to be unhelpful, offering unclear answers. After completing the task, participants then switched roles
and the machines began asking the people for assistance with their questions.
The study found that the group given helpful computers performed almost twice as much work for
their machines. The results showed that reciprocation is not just a characteristic expressed between
people, but also a trait observed when humans interact with machines. Conceivably, we humans
evolved the tendency to reciprocate kindness because it improved our species’ ability to survive. As
it turns out, we invest in products and services for the same reasons we put effort into our
relationships.
The big idea behind the Investment Phase is to leverage the user’s understanding that the service
will get better with use (and personal investment). Like a good friendship, the more effort people put

in, the more both parties benefit.
Storing Value
Unlike physical goods in the real world, the software that runs our technology products can adapt
itself to our needs. To become better with use, habit-forming technology utilizes investments users
make in the product to enhance the experience. The stored value users put into the product increases
the likelihood they will use it again in the future and comes in a variety of forms.
Content
Every time users of Apple’s iTunes add a song to their collection, they are strengthening ties to the
service. The songs on a playlist are an example of how content increases the value of a service.
Neither Apple iTunes nor their users created the songs, and yet, the more content users add, the more
valuable the music library becomes (figure 30).
By aggregating content with one service, users can do more with their music and iTunes gets better
with use by learning their preferences. With users’ continued investment, more songs also become
accessible on multiple Apple devices. In 2013, Apple revealed that its new iTunes Radio service
would provide personalized music recommendations based on the kind of music in users’ iTunes
collections. The new feature provides yet another example of how technology adapts and improves
based on users’ investment.
Figure 30
Content can also be created by users of a service. For example, every status update, “Like”, photo
or video shared on Facebook adds to the user’s timeline, retelling the story of one’s past experiences
and relationships. As users continue to share and interact with information on the service, their digital
life is recorded and archived. The collection of memories and experiences, in aggregate, becomes
more valuable over time and the service becomes harder to leave as users’ personal investment in the
site grows.
Data
Information generated, collected or created by users — such as songs, photos, or news clippings —
are examples of stored value in the form of content. But sometimes users invest in a service by either
actively or passively adding data about themselves or their behaviors.

On LinkedIn, the user’s online resume embodies the concept of data as stored value. Every time
job-seekers use the service, they are prompted to add more information. The company found that the
more information users invested in the site, the more committed they became to it. As Josh Elman, an
early Senior Product Manager at the company told me, “If we could get users to enter just a little
information, they were much more likely to return.” The tiny bit of effort associated with providing
more user data created a powerful hook to bring people back to the service.
Mint.com is an online personal finance tool used by millions of Americans. The service aggregates
all of the user’s accounts in one place, providing a complete picture of their financial life — but only
if they invest their time and data in the service. Mint provides multiple opportunities for users to
customize the site and make it more valuable with use. For example, the act of linking accounts,
categorizing transactions, or creating a budget are all forms of investment. The more data collected,
the more the service’s stored value increases (figure 31).
Figure 31
 
Followers
On the morning of Twitter’s IPO on November 7, 2013, a news commentator on Bloomberg’s
television channel said “the technology needed to build the company could be built in a day.”
[cvii] In
fact, he was right. Twitter is a simple application. With a bit of basic programming know-how,
anyone can build their very own clone of the multi-billion dollar social media behemoth.
In fact, several companies have tried to supplant the popular social network. One of the most
notable attempts came from a disgruntled developer who decided to build App.net, an ad-free
alternative that many tech industry watchers argue is actually a better product. But like other attempts
to copy the service, App.net has not taken off. Why not?
Collecting people to follow on Twitter, as well as collecting followers, provides tremendous
value and is a key driver of what keeps Twitter users hooked (figure 32).

Figure 32
From the follower side of the equation, the more Twitter users curate the list of people they follow,
the better the service will be at delivering interesting content. Investing in following the right people
increases the value of the product by displaying more relevant and interesting content in each user’s
Twitter feed. It also tells Twitter a lot about its users, which in turn improves the service overall.
For the tweeter seeking followers, the more followers one has, the more valuable the service
becomes as well. Content creators on Twitter seek to reach as large an audience as possible. The
only way to legitimately acquire new followers is to send tweets others think are interesting enough to
warrant following the sender. Therefore, to acquire more followers, content creators must invest in
producing more — and better — tweets. The cycle increases the value of the service for both sides
the more the service is used. For many users, switching services means abandoning years of
investment and starting over.  No one wants to rebuild a loyal following they have worked hard to
acquire and nurture.
Reputation
Reputation is a form of stored value users can literally take to the bank. On online marketplaces such
as eBay, TaskRabbit, Yelp, and Airbnb, people with negative scores are treated very differently from
those with good reputations. It can often be the deciding factor in what price a seller gets for an item
on eBay, who is selected for a TaskRabbit job, which restaurants appear at the top of Yelp search
results, and the price of a room rental on Airbnb.
On eBay, both buyers and sellers take their reputations very seriously. The e-commerce giant
surfaces user-generated quality scores for every buyer and seller, and awards its most active users
with badges to symbolize their trustworthiness. Businesses with bad reputations find it difficult, if not
impossible, to compete against highly-rated sellers. Reputation is a form of stored value that
increases the likelihood of using a service. Whether a buyer or seller, reputation makes users more
likely to stick with whichever service they have invested their efforts in to maintain a high quality
score (figure 33).

Figure 33
 
Skill
Investing time and effort into learning to use a product is a form of investment and stored value. Once
a user has acquired a skill, using the service becomes easier and moves them to the right on the
Ability axis of the Fogg Behavior Model we discussed in chapter three. As Fogg describes it, non-
routine is a factor of simplicity, and the more familiar a behavior is, the more likely the user is to do
it.
For example, Adobe Photoshop is the most widely-used professional graphics editing program in
the world. The software provides hundreds of advanced features for creating and manipulating
images. At first, learning the program is difficult, but as users become more familiar with the product
— often investing hours watching tutorials and reading how-to guides — their expertise and
efficiency using the product improves. They also achieve a sense of mastery (rewards of the self).
Unfortunately for the design professional, most of these learnings do not translate to competing
applications. Once users have invested the effort to acquire a skill, they are less likely to switch to a
competing product.
***
Like every phase in the Hook Model, the Investment Phase requires careful use. It is not a carte
blanche tool for asking users to do onerous tasks. In fact, quite the opposite. Just as in the Action
Phase described in chapter three, to achieve the intended behavior in the Investment Phase, the
product designer must consider whether users have sufficient motivation and ability to engage in the
intended behavior. If users are not doing what the designer intended in the Investment Phase, the
designer may be asking them to do too much. I recommend that you progressively stage the investment
you want from users into small chunks of work, starting with small, easy tasks and building up to
harder tasks during successive cycles through the Hook Model.
As we have just seen, users store value in the service during the Investment Phase. But one other
key opportunity found in the Investment Phase greatly increases the likelihood of users returning.
Loading the Next Trigger
As described in chapter two, triggers bring users back to the product. Ultimately, habit-forming
products create a mental association with an internal trigger. But to create the habit, users must first
use the product through multiple cycles of the Hook Model. Therefore, external triggers must be used
to bring users back around again to start another cycle.
Habit-forming technologies leverage the user's past behavior to initiate an external trigger in the
future. Users set future triggers during the Investment Phase, providing companies with an opportunity

to re-engage the user. Next, we will explore a few examples of how companies have helped load the
next trigger during the Investment Phase.
Any.do
User retention is a challenge for any business, but especially for consumer mobile applications.
According to a study by a mobile analytics firm, 26 percent of mobile apps in 2010 were downloaded
and used only once.
[cviii] Further data suggests people are using more applications but engaging with
them less frequently.
[cix]
Any.do is a simple mobile task management app used to record to-do items such as picking up dry
cleaning, restocking the fridge with milk or calling Mom. Recognizing the challenge of retaining
fickle mobile consumers, the app is designed to direct users to invest early on. During the first use of
the app, Any.do elegantly teaches how to use the product (figure 34). The trigger comes in the form of
the app’s clear, easy-to-follow instructions. The follow-on action is doing what the app tells the user
to do. The variable rewards come in the form of a congratulatory message and satisfaction of
mastering the app.
Then comes the investment. Newcomers are instructed to connect the app to their calendar service,
granting Any.do access to the user’s schedule. In doing so, users give the app permission to send a
notification after the next scheduled meeting ends. This external trigger prompts users to return to the
app to record a follow-up task from the meeting they just attended. In the Any.do scenario, the app
sends an external trigger to users at the moment when they are most likely to experience the internal
trigger of anxiety about forgetting to do a task after a meeting. The Any.do app has anticipated a need
and sets users up for success.
Figure 34
Tinder
In mid-2013, a hot new company entered the hyper-competitive online dating market. Tinder quickly
captured the attention of millions of people looking for love with a simple interface, generating 3.5

million matches from 350 million swipes each day.
[cx] After launching the mobile app and logging-in
with Facebook, users browse profiles of other singles. Each potential match is presented as a card.
Swipe left if you are not interested and right if that special someone catches your fancy (figure 35). If
both parties express interest, a match is made and a private chat connects the two potential lovebirds.
By simplifying the investment of sorting through potential mates, Tinder makes loading the next
trigger more likely with each swipe. The more swipes, the more potential matches are made and of
course, each match sends notifications to both interested parties.
Figure 35
Snapchat
As of June 2013, a popular photo sharing app called Snapchat boasted of five million daily active
users collectively sending over 200 million photos and videos daily.
[cxi] This tremendous engagement
means an average Snapchat user sends 40 pics every day!
But why are users so in love with Snapchat? In large part, its success can be attributed to the fact
that users load the next trigger every time they use the service. Snapchat is more than a way to share
images. It is a means of communication akin to sending an SMS message — with the added bonus of a
built-in timer that can cause the message to self-destruct after viewing, based on the sender’s
instructions. Users pass through the Investment Phase of the Hook Model each time they send a selfie,
doodle, or goofy photo. Each photo or video sent contains an implicit prompt to respond and the
Snapchat interface makes returning a pic incredibly easy by double tapping the original message to
reply. The self-destruct feature encourages timely responses, leading to a back-and-forth relay that
keeps people hooked into the service by loading the next trigger with each message sent.
Pinterest

Like many social networks, Pinterest loads the next trigger during the Investment Phase of the hook.
For many of the site’s 50 million monthly users, the online pinboard replaced the habit of browsing
fashion-focused websites — and before the web, flipping through magazines and dog-earing favorite
pages.
[cxii]
The internal trigger for users is often boredom, for which the site offers a quick cure. Once
registered, the only action required of users is to start scrolling as Pinterest showcases a wealth of
variable rewards. First, because Pinterest is a socially-curated collection of interesting items, the site
displays a powerful intermittent reward surrounding the hunt for objects of desire, even if they are
only images. The site also provides a means of communicating with friends and people who share
similar tastes. The Rewards of the Tribe come from the variability of posting images as a
communication medium. A user might be curious to know what a friend has pinned not only because
of the image itself, but because of her relationship with the pinner.
Finally, Pinterest users invest in the site every time they pin an image of their own, re-pin someone
else’s image, comment on, or like a piece of content on the site (figure 36). Each of these tiny
investments gives Pinterest data it can use to tailor the site to each user’s individual taste, it also
loads the next trigger. Each pin, re-pin, like, or comment gives Pinterest tacit permission to reach
back out to the user with a notification when someone else contributes to the thread, triggering the
desire to visit the site again to learn more.
Figure 36
***
Pinterest clearly demonstrates the four stages of the Hook Model. It is a seamless flow, from the itch
of the internal trigger that moves users to the intended action, through the variable reward, and finally
to the investment, which also loads the next external trigger. Pinterest users move through the Hook
cycle from beginning to end, and then happily return to the starting point for another go ‘round.
In this chapter, we have learned how an investment in the product serves as the string that pulls the
user back. To do this, the habit-forming technology increases the value of the product with each pass
through the Hook. Through successive cycles of the Hook Model, users increase their affinity for the
experience. They increasingly come to rely on the product as the solution to their problems until
finally, the new habit — and routine — is formed.
The more users invest in a product through tiny bits of work, the more valuable the product
becomes in their lives and the less they question its use. Of course, users do not stay hooked forever.
Invariably, the next big thing will come along and provide a better, more compelling hook. However,

by creating habits fueled by investments in a product or service, companies make switching to a
competitor difficult. User habits are hard to break and confer powerful competitive advantages to any
company fortunate enough to successfully create them.
***
Remember and Share
- The Investment Phase is the fourth step in the Hook Model.
- Unlike the Action Phase, which delivers immediate gratification, the Investment Phase is
about the anticipation of rewards in the future.
- Investments in a product create preference because of our tendency to overvalue our work, be
consistent with past behaviors, and avoid cognitive dissonance.
- Investment comes after the variable reward phase when users are primed to reciprocate.
- Investments increase the likelihood of users returning by improving the service the more it is
used. They enable the accrual of stored value in the form of content, data, followers, reputation or
skill.
- Investments increase the likelihood of users passing through the Hook again by loading the
next trigger to start the cycle all over again.
***
Do This Now
Refer to the answers you came up with in the last “Do This Now”  section to complete the following
exercises:
- Review your flow. What “bit of work” are your users doing to increase their likelihood of
returning?
- Brainstorm three ways to add small investments into your product to:
- Load the next trigger
- Store value as data, content, followers, reputation and skill
- Identify how long it takes for a “loaded trigger” to re-engage your users. How can you reduce
the delay to shorten cycle-time through the Hook?
 

6. WHAT ARE YOU GOING TO DO WITH THIS?
 
The Hook Model is designed to connect the user’s problem with the designer’s solution frequently
enough to form a habit. It is a framework for building products that solve user needs through long-
term engagement.
As users pass through cycles of The Hook Model, they learn to meet their needs with the habit-
forming product. Effective hooks transition users from relying upon external triggers to cueing mental
associations with internal triggers. Users move from states of low engagement to high engagement and
from low preference to high preference.
You are now equipped to use the Hook Model to ask yourself these five fundamental questions for
building effective hooks:
1.   What do users really want? What pain is your product relieving?
(Internal Trigger)
2.   What brings users to your service? (External Trigger)
3.   What is the simplest action users take in anticipation of reward, and
how can you simplify your product to make this action easier? (Action)
4.   Are users fulfilled by the reward, yet left wanting more? (Variable
Reward)
5.   What “bit of work” do users invest in your product? Does it load the
next trigger and store value to improve the product with use?
(Investment)
***
The Morality of Manipulation
So now what? Now that you’re aware of the pattern for building habit-forming technology, how will
you use this knowledge?
Perhaps while reading this book you asked yourself if the Hook Model is a recipe for
manipulation. Maybe you felt a bit unsettled reading what seemed like a cookbook for mind control. If
so, that is a very good thing.
The Hook Model is fundamentally about changing people’s behaviors; but the power to build
persuasive products should be used with caution. Creating habits can be a force for good, but it can
also be used for nefarious purposes. What responsibility do product makers have when creating user
habits?
Let’s admit it, we are all in the persuasion business.
[cxiii] Technologists build products meant to
persuade people to do what we want them to do. We call these people “users” and even if we don’t
say it aloud, we secretly wish every one of them would become fiendishly hooked to whatever we’re
making. I’m guessing that’s likely why you started reading this book.
Users take their technologies with them to bed.
[cxiv] When they wake up, they check for notifications,
tweets, and updates, sometimes even before saying “Good morning” to their loved ones. Ian Bogost,
the famed game creator and professor, calls the wave of habit-forming technologies the “cigarette of
this century” and warns of their equally addictive and potentially destructive side-effects.
[cxv]
You may be asking, “When is it wrong to manipulate users?”

Manipulation is an experience crafted to change behavior — we all know what it feels like. We’re
uncomfortable when we sense someone is trying to make us do something we wouldn’t do otherwise,
like when sitting through a car salesman’s spiel or hearing a timeshare presentation.
Yet, manipulation doesn’t always have a negative connotation. If it did, how could we explain the
numerous multi-billion-dollar industries that rely heavily on users being willingly manipulated?
If manipulation is an experience crafted to change behavior, then Weight Watchers, one of the most
successful mass-manipulation products in history, fits the definition.
[cxvi] Weight Watchers customers’
decisions are programmed by the designer of the system. Yet, few question the morality of the
business.
But what is the difference? Why is manipulating users through flashy advertising or addictive video
games thought to be distasteful while a strict system of food rationing is considered laudable? While
many people see Weight Watchers as an acceptable form of user manipulation, our moral compass
has not caught up with what the latest technology now makes possible.
Ubiquitous access to the web, transferring greater amounts of personal data at faster speeds than
ever before, has created a more potentially addictive world. According to famed Silicon Valley
investor Paul Graham, we haven’t had time to develop societal “antibodies to addictive new
things.”
[cxvii] Graham places responsibility on the user: “Unless we want to be canaries in the coal mine
of each new addiction — the people whose sad example becomes a lesson to future generations —
we’ll have to figure out for ourselves what to avoid and how.”
But what of the people who make these manipulative experiences? After all, the corporations that
unleash these habit-forming, and at times addictive, technologies are made up of human beings with a
moral sense of right and wrong. They too have families and kids who are susceptible to manipulation.
What shared responsibilities do we growth-hackers and behavior-designers have to our users, to
future generations, and to ourselves?
With the increasing pervasiveness and persuasiveness of personal technology, some industry
insiders have proposed creating an ethical code of conduct.
[cxviii] Others believe differently: Chris
Nodder, author of the book Evil by Design, writes “... it’s OK to deceive people if it’s in their best
interests, or if they’ve given implicit consent to be deceived as part of a persuasive strategy.”
[cxix]
I offer a simple decision support tool entrepreneurs, employees, and investors can use long before
product is shipped or code is written. The Manipulation Matrix does not try to answer which
businesses are moral or which will succeed, nor does it describe what can and can not become a
habit-forming technology. The matrix seeks to help you answer not, “Can I hook my users?” but
instead, “Should I attempt to?”
To use the Manipulation Matrix (figure 36), the maker needs to ask two questions. First, “Would I
use the product myself?” and second, “Will the product help users materially improve their lives?”

Figure 36
Remember, this framework is for creating habit-forming products, not one-time use goods. Now,
let’s explore the types of creators who represent the four quadrants of the Manipulation Matrix.
 
The Facilitator
When you create something that you would use and that you believe makes the user’s life better, you
are facilitating a healthy habit. It is important to note that only you can decide if you would actually
use the product or service, and what “materially improving the life of the user” really means in light
of what you are creating.
If you find yourself squirming as you ask yourself these questions or needing to qualify or justify
your answers, STOP! You failed. You have to actually want to use the product and believe it
materially benefits your life as well as the lives of your users.
One exception is if you would have been a user in your younger years. For example, in the case of
an education company, you may not need to use the service right now, but are certain you would have
used it in your not-so-distant past. Note however that the further you are from your former self, the
lower your odds of success.
In building a habit for a user other than yourself, you can not consider yourself a facilitator unless
you have experienced the problem first-hand.
Jake Harriman grew up on a small farm in West Virginia. After graduating from the U.S. Naval
Academy, Harriman served as an Infantry and Special Operations Platoon Commander in the Marine
Corps. He was in Iraq during the 2003 invasion and led men into fierce gun battles with enemy
combatants. Later, he assisted with disaster relief in Indonesia and Sri Lanka after the 2004 Asian
tsunami.
Harriman says his encounter with extreme poverty abroad changed his life. After seven and a half
years of active duty, Harriman realized that guns alone could not stop terrorists intent on harming
Americans. “Desperate people commit desperate acts,” Harriman says. After his service, Harriman
founded Nuru International, a social venture targeting extreme poverty by changing the habits of
people living in rural areas.
However, exactly how Harriman would change the lives of the poorest people in the world was
not clear to him until he decided to live among them. In Kenya, he discovered that basic practices of
modern agriculture — like proper seed spacing — were still not used. But Harriman knew that
simply teaching farmers new behaviors would not be enough.

Instead, by drawing upon his own rural upbringing and experience living with the farmers,
Harriman uncovered the obstacles in their way. He soon learned that the lack of access to financing
for high quality seeds and fertilizer kept farmers from utilizing yield-boosting techniques.
Today, Nuru is equipping farmers in Kenya and Ethiopia, helping them rise out of grinding poverty.
It was only by becoming one of his users that Harriman could design solutions to meet their needs.
[cxx]
Although it is a long way from Africa to Silicon Valley, the well-documented stories of the
founders of Facebook and Twitter reveal they would likely see themselves as making products in the
facilitator quadrant. Today, a new breed of companies is creating products to improve lives by
creating healthy habits. Whether getting users to exercise more, creating a habit of journaling, or
improving back posture, these companies are run by authentic entrepreneurs who desperately want
their products to exist, firstly to satisfy their own needs.
But what if the usage of a well-intended product becomes extreme, even harmful? What about the
users who go beyond forming habits, becoming full-fledged addicts?
First, it is important to recognize that the percentage of users who form a detrimental dependency is
very small. Industry estimates for pathological users of even the most habit-forming technologies,
such as slot machines gambling, are just one percent.
[cxxi] Addiction tends to manifest in people with a
particular psychological profile. However, simply brushing off the issue as too small to matter
dismisses the very real problems caused by technology addiction.
For the first time, however, companies have access to data that could be used to flag which users
are using their products too much. Whether companies choose to act on that data in a way that aids
their users is, of course, a question of corporate responsibility. Companies building habit-forming
technologies have a moral obligation — and perhaps someday a legal mandate — to inform and
protect users who are forming unhealthy attachments to their products. It would behoove
entrepreneurs building potentially addictive products to set guidelines for identifying and helping
addicted users.
However, for the overwhelming majority of users, addiction to a product will never be a problem.
Even though the world is becoming a potentially more addictive place, most people have the ability
to self-regulate their behaviors.
The role of facilitator fulfills the moral obligation for entrepreneurs building a product they will
use, and which they believe materially improves the lives of others. As long as they have procedures
in place to assist those who form unhealthy addictions, the designer can act with a clean conscience.
To take liberties with Mahatma Gandhi’s famous quote, facilitators “build the change they want to see
in the world.”
The Peddler
Heady altruistic ambitions can at times outpace reality. Too often, designers of manipulative
technology have a strong motivation to improve the lives of their users, but when pressed, they admit
they would not actually use their own creations. Their holier-than-thou products often try to “gamify”
some task no one actually wants to do by inserting run-of-the-mill incentives such as badges or points
that don’t actually hold value for their users.
Fitness apps, charity websites, and products that claim to suddenly turn hard work into fun often
fall in this quadrant. But possibly the most common example of peddlers is in advertising.
Countless companies convince themselves they’re making ad campaigns users will love. They
expect their videos to go viral and their branded apps to be used daily. Their so-called “reality
distortion fields” keep them from asking the critical question, “Would I actually find this useful?”
[cxxii]

The answer to this uncomfortable question is nearly always “No,” so they twist their thinking until
they can imagine a user they believe might find the ad valuable.
Materially improving users’ lives is a tall order, and attempting to create a persuasive technology
that you do not use yourself is incredibly difficult. This puts designers at a heavy disadvantage
because of their disconnect with their products and users. There’s nothing immoral about peddling; in
fact, many companies working on solutions for others do so out of purely altruistic reasons. It’s just
that the odds of successfully designing products for a customer you don’t know extremely well are
depressingly low. Peddlers tend to lack the empathy and insights needed to create something users
actually want. Often the peddler's project results in a time-wasting failure because the designers did
not fully understand their users. As a result, no one finds the product useful.
The Entertainer
Sometimes product-makers just want to have fun. If creators of a potentially addictive technology
make something that they use but can’t in good conscience claim improves users’ lives, they’re
making entertainment.
Entertainment is art and is important for its own sake. Art provides joy, helps us see the world
differently, and connects us with the human condition. These are all important and age-old pursuits.
Entertainment, however, has particular attributes of which the entrepreneur, employee, and investor
should be aware when using the Manipulation Matrix.
Art is often fleeting; products that form habits around entertainment tend to fade quickly from users’
lives. A hit song, repeated over and over again in the mind, becomes nostalgia after it is replaced by
the next chart-topper. A book like this one is read and thought about for a while until the next
interesting piece of brain candy comes along. As we learned in the chapter on variable rewards,
games like FarmVille and Angry Birds engross users, but then are relegated to the gaming dustbin
along with other hyper-addictive has-beens such as Pac Man and Mario Bros.
Entertainment is a hits-driven business because the brain reacts to stimulus by wanting more and
more of it, ever hungry for continuous novelty. Building an enterprise on ephemeral desires is akin to
running on an incessantly rolling treadmill: You have to keep up with the constantly changing
demands of your users. In this quadrant, the sustainable business is not purely the game, the song, or
the book — profit comes from an effective distribution system for getting those goods to market while
they’re still hot, and at the same time keeping the pipeline full of fresh releases to feed an eager
audience. 
The Dealer
Creating a product that the designer does not believe improves users’ lives and that he himself would
not use is called exploitation. In the absence of these two criteria, presumably the only reason the
designer is hooking users is to make a buck. Certainly there is money to be made addicting users to
behaviors that do little more than extract cash; and where there is cash, there will be someone willing
to take it.
The question is: Is that someone you? Casinos and drug dealers offer users a good time, but when
the addiction takes hold, the fun stops.
In a satirical take on Zynga’s FarmVille franchise, Ian Bogost created Cow Clicker, a Facebook
app where users did nothing but incessantly click on virtual cows to hear a satisfying “moo.”
[cxxiii]
Bogost intended to lampoon FarmVille by blatantly implementing the same game mechanics and viral
hacks he thought would be laughably obvious to users. But after the app’s usage exploded and some

people became frighteningly obsessed with the game, Bogost shut it down, bringing on what he called
“The Cowpocalypse.”
[cxxiv]
Bogost rightfully compared addictive technology to cigarettes. Certainly, the incessant need for a
smoke in what was once a majority of the adult U.S. population has been replaced by a nearly equal
compulsion to constantly check our devices. But unlike the addiction to nicotine, new technologies
offer an opportunity to dramatically improve users’ lives. Like all technologies, recent advances in
the habit-forming potential of digital innovation have both positive and negative effects.
But if the innovator has a clear conscience that the product materially improves people’s lives —
first among them, the designer’s — then the only path is to push forward. With the exception of the
addicted one percent, users bear ultimate responsibility for their actions.
However, as the march of technology makes the world a potentially more addictive place,
innovators need to consider their role. It will be years, perhaps generations, before society develops
the mental antibodies to control new habits; in the meantime, many of these behaviors may develop
harmful side-effects. For now, users must learn to assess these yet-unknown consequences for
themselves, while creators will have to live with the moral repercussions of how they spend their
professional lives.
My hope is that the Manipulation Matrix helps innovators consider the implications of the products
they create. Perhaps after reading this book, you’ll start a new business. Maybe you’ll join an existing
company with a mission to which you are committed. Or, perhaps you will decide it is time to quit
your job because you’ve come to realize it no longer points in the same direction as your moral
compass.
***
Remember and Share
- To help designers of habit-forming technology assess the morality behind how they manipulate
users, it is helpful to determine which of the four categories their work fits into. Are you a
facilitator, peddler, entertainer, or dealer?
- Facilitators use their own product and believe it can materially improve people’s lives. They
have the highest chance of success because they most closely understand the needs of their users.
- Peddlers believe their product can materially improve people’s lives, but do not use it
themselves. They must beware of the hubris and inauthenticity that comes from building solutions
for people they do not understand.
- Entertainers use their product, but do not believe it can improve people’s lives. They can be
successful, but without making the lives of others better in some way, the entertainer’s products
often lack staying power.
- Dealers neither use the product nor believe it can improve people’s lives. They have the lowest
chance of finding long-term success and often find themselves in morally precarious positions.
***
Do This Now
- Take a minute to consider where you fall on the Manipulation Matrix. Do you use your own
product or service? Does it influence positive or negative behaviors? How does it make you feel?
Ask yourself if you are proud of the way you are influencing the behavior of others.


7. CASE STUDY: THE BIBLE APP
 
In the previous chapter, I urged you to be a facilitator and to use the tools in this book to improve the
lives of others. I encouraged you to align your work with a purpose that provides you with meaning
and helps cultivate meaning for others. This is not only a moral imperative, it’s good business
practice.
The most highly regarded entrepreneurs are driven by meaning, a vision for greater good that
drives them forward. Startups are grueling and only the most fortunate persevere before finding
success. If you only build for fame or fortune, you will likely find neither. But build for meaning and
you can’t go wrong.
The Hook Model is a framework based on human psychology and a close examination of today’s
most successful habit-forming products. Now that you have an understanding of the model and the
psychology behind why we do the things we do, let’s study how it all comes together in one of the
world’s most popular apps. Whether you agree with the mission of the app described below is not
important. The lesson here is how a technology company created a user habit while staying true to the
founder’s moral calling.
It’s not often an app has the power to keep someone out of a strip club. But according to Bobby
Gruenewald, CEO of YouVersion, that’s exactly what his technology did. Gruenewald says a user of
his Bible verse app walked into a business of ill repute when suddenly, seemingly out of the heavens,
he received a notification on his phone. “God’s trying to tell me something!,” Gruenewald recalled
the user saying. “I just walked into a strip club — and man — the Bible just texted me!”
In July 2013, YouVersion announced a monumental milestone for the app, placing it in a rare strata
of technology companies. The app, simply called “Bible,” has been downloaded to more than 100
million devices and growing.
[cxxv] Gruenewald says a new install occurs every 1.3 seconds.
On average, 66,000 people open the app every second — and sometimes the open rate is much
higher. Every Sunday, Gruenewald says, preachers around the world tell congregants to “take out
your Bibles or YouVersion app. And, we see a huge spike.”
The market for religious apps is fiercely competitive. Searching for “Bible” in the Apple App
Store returns 5,185 results. But among all the choices, YouVersion’s Bible seems to be the chosen
one, ranking at the top of the list and boasting over 641,000 reviews.
How did YouVersion come to dominate the digital, “word of God?” It turns out there is much more
behind the app’s success than missionary zeal. It’s a case study in how technology can change
behavior by marrying the principles of consumer psychology with the latest in big data analytics.
According to industry insiders, the YouVersion Bible could be worth a bundle. Jules Maltz,
General Partner at Institutional Venture Partners, told me, “As a rule of thumb, a company this size
could be worth $200 million and up.”
Maltz should know. His firm announced an investment in another pre-revenue app, Snapchat, at an
$800 million valuation in July 2013.
[cxxvi] Maltz justifies the price by pointing to the per-user valuations
of other tech companies such as Facebook, Instagram and Twitter, each of which commanded
astronomical investment sums well before turning a profit. Maltz was quick to add, “Of course, this
assumes the company can monetize through advertising.”
In the Beginning
Gruenewald is a quick-thinking, fast-talking man. During our conversation, he pulled up statistics in

real-time, stopping himself mid-sentence whenever relevant data flashed on his screen. As
Gruenewald preaches on about mobile app development best practices, I need to occasionally
interrupt him to ask clarifying questions. My words stumble over his enthusiasm as he bears witness
to what he’s learned building his app. He spouts user retention figures with the same gusto I’d
imagine he might proclaim scripture.
“Unlike other companies, when we started, we were not building a Bible reader for seminary
students. YouVersion was designed to be used by everyone, every day,” Gruenewald says, attributing
much of the app’s success to a relentless focus on creating habitual Bible readers. The Bible app’s
success is broken down into the language of habit formation more commonly seen in psychology
textbooks. The “cues,” “behaviors” and “rewards” of communing with the Lord are bullet-pointed
and ready for our discussion.
“Bible study guides are nothing new,” Gruenewald says. “People have been using them with pen
and paper long before we came along.” But I soon find out, the Bible app is much more than a mobile
study guide.
In fact, the first version of YouVersion was not mobile at all. “We originally started as a desktop
website, but that really didn’t engage people in the Bible. It wasn’t until we tried a mobile version
that we noticed a difference in people, including ourselves, turning to the Bible more because it was
on a device they always had with them.”
This is not surprising. The Fogg Behavior Model (chapter three) notes that for an action to occur,
users must receive a trigger and have sufficient motivation and ability to complete it. If any of these
elements are missing or inadequate at the moment the trigger arises, the action will not occur.
The omnipresence of the Bible app makes it far more accessible than its website predecessor,
giving users the ability to open the mobile app when triggered by the pastor’s instructions or when
feeling inspired at other moments throughout their day. Its users take it everywhere, reading the
scripture in even the most unsanctified places. The company revealed that 18 percent of readers
report using the Bible app in the bathroom.
[cxxvii]
How to Form a God Habit
Gruenewald acknowledges his Bible app enjoyed the good fortune of being among the first of its kind
at the genesis of the App Store in 2008. To take advantage of the newly established App Store,
Gruenewald quickly converted his website into a mobile app optimized for reading. The app caught
the rising tide, but soon a wave of competition followed. If his app was to reign supreme,
Gruenewald needed to get users hooked quickly.
That’s when Gruenewald says he implemented a plan — actually, many plans. A signature of the
Bible app is its selection of over 400 reading plans — a devotional iTunes of sorts, catering to an
audience with diverse tastes, troubles, and tongues. Given my personal interest and research into
habit-forming technology, I decided to start a Bible reading plan of my own. A plan titled
“Addictions” seemed appropriate.
For those who have yet to form a routine around Biblical study, reading plans provide structure and
guidance. “Certain sections of the Bible can be difficult for people to get through,” Gruenewald
admits. “By offering reading plans with different small sections of the Bible each day, it helps keep
[readers] from giving up.”
The app chunks out and sequences the text by separating it into bite-sized pieces. By parsing
readings into digestible communion wafer-sized portions, the app focuses the reader’s brain on the
small task at hand while avoiding the intimidation of reading the entire book.

 
Holy Triggers
Five years of testing and tinkering have helped Gruenewald’s team discover what works best. Today,
the Bible app’s reading plans are tuned to immaculate perfection and Gruenewald has learned that
frequency of use is paramount. “We’ve always focused on daily reading. Our entire structure for
plans focuses on daily engagement.”
To get users to open the app every day, Gruenewald makes sure he sends effective cues — like the
notification sent to the sinner in the strip club. But Gruenewald admits he stumbled upon the power of
good triggers. “At first we were very worried about sending people notifications. We didn’t want to
bother them too much.”
To test how much of a cross users were willing to bear, Gruenewald decided to run an experiment.
“For Christmas, we sent people a message from the app. Just a ‘Merry Christmas’ in various
languages.” The team was prepared to hear from disgruntled users annoyed by the message. “We
were afraid people would uninstall the app,” Gruenewald says. “But just the opposite happened.
People took pictures of the notification on their phones and started sharing them on Instagram, Twitter
and Facebook. They felt God was reaching out to them.” Today, Gruenewald says, triggers play an
important role in every reading plan.
On my own plan, I receive a daily notification — an owned external trigger — on my phone. It
simply says, “Don’t forget to read your Addictions reading plan.” Ironically, the addiction I’m trying
to cure is my dependency on digital gadgetry, but what the hell, I’ll fall off the wagon just this once.
In case I somehow avoid the first message, a red badge over a tiny Holy Bible icon on my phone
cues me again. If I forget to start the first day of a plan, I’ll receive a message suggesting that perhaps
I should try a different, less-challenging plan. I also have the option of receiving verse through email.
And if I slip up and miss a few days, another email reminds me to get back on track.
The Bible app also comes with a virtual congregation of sorts. Members of the site tend to send
encouraging words to one another, delivering even more triggers. According to the company’s
publicist, “Community emails can serve as a nudge to open the app.” These relationship-based
external triggers are everywhere in the Bible app and are one of the keys to keeping users engaged.
Glory Be in the Data
Gruenewald’s team sifts through behavioral data collected from millions of readers to better
understand what users want from the app. “We just have so much data flowing through our system,”
Gruenewald says. The data reveals important insights on what drives user retention. High on the list
of learnings is the importance of “ease of use,” which came up throughout our conversation.
In line with the work of psychologists from early Gestalt psychologist Kurt Lewin to modern-day
researchers, the app uses the principle that by making an intended action easier to do, people will do
it more often.
The Bible app is designed to make absorbing the Word as frictionless as possible. For example, to
make the Bible app habit easier to adopt, users who prefer listening over reading can simply tap a
small icon to play an audio track read with the dramatic bravado of Charlton Heston himself.
Gruenewald says his data also revealed that changing the order of the Bible by placing the more
interesting sections up-front and saving the boring bits for later increased completion rates.
Furthermore, daily reading plans are kept to a simple inspirational thought and a few short verses for
newcomers. The idea is to get neophytes into the ritual for a few minutes each day until the routine
becomes a facet of their everyday lives.

Rewards from the Lord
Gruenewald says the connection people have with scripture taps into deep emotions that “we need to
use responsibly.” Readers who form a habit of using the app turn to it not only when they see a
notification on their phone, but also whenever they feel low and need a way to lift their spirits.
“We believe that the Bible is a way God speaks to us,” Gruenewald says. “When people see a
verse, they see wisdom or truth they can apply to their lives or a situation they’re going through.”
Skeptics might call this “subjective validation,” and psychologists call it the “Forer Effect,” but to the
faithful, it amounts to personally communicating with God.
Upon opening the Bible app, I find a specially selected verse waiting for me on the topic of
“Addictions.” With just two taps I’m reading 1 Thessalonians 5:11 — encouragement for the
“children of the day,” imploring them with the words, “let us be sober.” It’s easy to see how these
comforting words could serve as a sort of prize wrapped inside the app, helping readers feel better.
Gruenewald says his Bible app also offers an element of mystery and variability. “One woman
would stay up until just past midnight to know what verse she had received for her next day,”
Gruenewald says. The unknown — in this case, which verse will be chosen for the reader and how it
relates to their personal struggle — becomes an important driver of the reading habit.
As for my own reward, after finishing my verse, I received affirmation from a satisfying ”Day
Complete!” screen. A check mark appeared near the scripture I had read and another one was placed
on my reading plan calendar. Skipping a day would mean breaking the chain of checked days,
employing what psychologists call the “endowed progress effect” — a tactic also used by video game
designers to encourage progression.
As habit-forming as the Bible app’s reading plans can be, they are not for everyone. In fact,
Gruenewald reports most users downloaded the app but never register for an account with
YouVersion. Millions choose to not follow any plan, opting instead to use the app as a substitute for
their paper Bibles. But to Gruenewald, using the app in this way suits him fine. Unregistered readers
are still helping to grow the app. In fact, social media is abuzz with the 200,000 pieces of content
shared from the app every 24-hours.
To help the app spread, a new verse greets the reader on the first page. Below the verse, a large
blue button reads, “Share Verse of the Day.” One click and the daily scripture is blasted to Facebook
or Twitter.
The drivers behind recently read scripture have not been widely studied. However, one reason
may be the reward portraying oneself in a positive light, also known as the “humblebrag.”
[cxxviii] A
Harvard meta-analysis entitled “Disclosing information about the self is intrinsically rewarding”
found the act, “engages neural and cognitive mechanisms associated with reward.”
[cxxix] In fact, sharing
feels so good that one study found “individuals were willing to forgo money to disclose about the
self.”
There are many opportunities to share verse from within the Bible app, but one of Gruenewald’s
most effective distribution channels is not online but in-row — that is, in the pews where church-
goers sit side by side every week.
“People tell each other about the app because they use it surrounded by people who ask about it,”
Gruenewald says. The app always sees a spike in new downloads on Sundays when people are most
likely to share it through word of mouth.
However, nothing signals the reign of Gruenewald’s Bible app quite like the way some preachers
have come to depend upon it. YouVersion lets religious leaders input their sermons into the app so

their congregants can follow along in real-time — book, verse, and passage — all without flipping a
page. Once the head of the church is hooked, the congregation is sure to follow.
Using the Bible app at church not only has the benefit of driving growth, it also builds commitment.
Every time users highlight a verse, add a comment, create a bookmark or share from the app, they
invest in it.
As described in an earlier chapter, Dan Ariely and Michael Norton have shown the effect small
amounts of work have on the way people value various products. This “IKEA effect” illustrates the
connection between labor and perceived worth.
It is reasonable to think that the more readers put into the Bible app in the form of small
investments, the more it becomes a repository of their history of worship. Like a dog-eared book, full
of scribbled insights and wisdom, the app becomes a treasured asset that won’t easily be discarded.
The more readers use the Bible app, the more valuable it becomes to them. Switching to a different
digital Bible — God forbid — becomes less likely with each new revelation users type into (or
extract from) the app, further securing YouVersion’s dominion.
Gruenewald claims he is not in competition with anyone, but he does on occasion rattle off the App
Store categories where his app holds a high ranking. His app’s place at the top of the charts appears
secure now that the Bible has crossed its 100 millionth install. But Gruenewald plans to continue
sifting through the terabytes of data in search of new ways to increase the reach of his app and make
his version of the Bible even more habit-forming. To its tens of millions of regular users,
Gruenewald’s app is a Godsend.
***
Remember and Share
- The Bible app was far less engaging as a desktop website. The mobile interface increased
accessibility and usage by providing frequent triggers.
- The Bible app increases users' ability to take action by front-loading interesting content and
providing an alternative audio version.
- By separating the verses into small chunks, users find the Bible easier to read on a daily basis.
Not knowing what the next verse will be adds a variable reward.
- Every annotation, bookmark and highlight stores data (and value) in the app, further
committing users.

8. HABIT TESTING AND WHERE TO LOOK FOR HABIT-FORMING OPPORTUNITIES
 
Now that you have an understanding of the Hook Model and have reflected on the morality of
influencing user behavior, it is time to get to work. Running your idea through the four phases of the
model will help you discover potential weaknesses in your product’s habit-forming potential.
Does your users’ internal trigger frequently prompt them to action? Is your external trigger cueing
them when they are most likely to act? Is your design simple enough to make taking the action easy?
Does the reward satisfy your users’ need while leaving them wanting more? Do your users invest a
bit of work in the product, storing value to improve the experience with use and loading the next
trigger?
By identifying where your technology is lacking, you can focus on developing improvements to
your product where it matters most.
Habit Testing
By following the “Do This Now” sections in previous chapters, you should have enough knowledge
to prototype your product. But simply coming up with ideas is not enough, and creating user habits is
often easier said than done. The process of developing successful habit-forming technologies requires
patience and persistence. The Hook Model can be a helpful tool for filtering out bad ideas with low
habit potential as well as a framework for identifying room for improvement in existing products.
However, after the designer has formulated new hypotheses, there is no way to know which ideas
will work without testing them with actual users.
Building a habit-forming product is an iterative process and requires user behavior analysis and
continuous experimentation. How can you implement the concepts in this book to measure your
product’s effectiveness building user habits?
Through my studies and discussions with entrepreneurs at today’s most successful habit-forming
companies, I’ve distilled this process into what I call “Habit Testing.” It is a process inspired by the
build-measure-learn methodology championed by the lean startup movement. Habit Testing offers
insights and actionable data to inform the design of habit-forming products. It helps clarify who your
devotees are, what parts of your product are habit-forming (if any), and why those aspects of your
product are changing user behavior.
Habit Testing does not always require a live product; however, it can be difficult to draw clear
conclusions without a comprehensive view of how people are using your system. The following steps
assume you have a product, users, and meaningful data to explore.
Step 1: Identify
The initial question for Habit Testing is “Who are the product’s habitual users?” Remember, the more
frequently your product is used, the more likely it is to form a user habit.
First, define what it means to be a devoted user. How often “should” one use your product? The
answer to this question is very important and can widely change your perspective. Publicly available
data from similar products or solutions can help define your users and engagement targets. If data is
not available, educated assumptions must be made — but be realistic and honest.
If you are building a social networking app like Twitter or Instagram, you should expect habitual
users to visit the service multiple times per day. On the other hand, you should not expect users of a
movie recommendation site like Rotten Tomatoes to visit more than once or twice a week (since their

visits will come on the heels of seeing a movie or researching one to watch). Don’t come up with an
overly aggressive prediction that only accounts for uber-users; you are looking for a realistic guess to
calibrate how often typical users will interact with your product.
Once you know how often users should use your product, dig into the numbers and identify how
many and which type of users meet this threshold. As a best practice, use cohort analysis to measure
changes in user behavior through future product iterations.
Step 2: Codify
Hopefully you’ve identified a few users who meet the criteria of habitual users. But how many users
are enough? My rule of thumb is five percent. Though your rate of active users will need to be much
higher to sustain your business, this is a good initial benchmark.
However, if at least five percent of your users don’t find your product valuable enough to use as
much as you predicted they would, you may have a problem. Either you identified the wrong users or
your product needs to go back to the drawing board. But if you have exceeded that bar and identified
your habitual users, the next step is to codify the steps they took using your product to understand what
hooked them.
Users will interact with your product in slightly different ways. Even if you have a standard user
flow, the way users engage with your product creates a unique fingerprint. Where users are coming
from, decisions made when registering, and the number of friends using the service, are just a few of
the behaviors that help create a recognizable pattern. Sift through the data to determine if similarities
emerge. You’re looking for a “Habit Path,” — a series of similar actions shared by your most loyal
users.
For example, in its early days, Twitter discovered that once new users followed 30 other members,
they hit a tipping point which dramatically increased the odds they would keep using the site.
[cxxx]
Every product has a different set of actions that devoted users take; the goal of finding the Habit
Path is to determine which of these steps is critical for creating devoted users so that you can modify
the experience to encourage this behavior.
Step 3: Modify
Armed with new insights, it is time to revisit your product and identify ways to nudge new users
down the same Habit Path taken by devotees. This may include an update to the registration funnel,
content changes, feature removal, or increased emphasis on an existing feature. Twitter used the
insights gained from the previous step to modify its on-boarding process, encouraging new users to
immediately begin following others.
Habit Testing is a continual process you can implement with every new feature and product
iteration. Tracking users by cohort and comparing their activity to habitual users should guide how
products evolve and improve.
Discovering Habit-forming Opportunities
The Habit Testing process requires the product designer to have an existing product to test. But where
might you look to find potentially habit-forming experiences ripe for new technological solutions?
When it comes to developing new products, there are no guarantees. Along with creating an
engaging product as described in this book, startups must also find a way to monetize and grow.
Although this book does not cover business models for delivering customer value or methods for
profitable customer acquisition, both are necessary components of any successful business. Several

things must go right for a new company to succeed, and forming user habits is just one of them.
As we saw in chapter six, being a “facilitator” is not only a moral imperative, it also makes for
better businesses practices. Creating a product the designer uses and believes materially improves
people’s lives increases the odds of delivering something people want. Therefore, the first place for
the entrepreneur or designer to look for new opportunities is in the mirror. Paul Graham advises
entrepreneurs to leave the sexy-sounding business ideas behind and instead build for their own needs:
“Instead of asking ‘what problem should I solve?’ ask ‘what problem do I wish someone else would
solve for me?’”
[cxxxi]
Studying your own needs can lead to remarkable discoveries and new ideas because the designer
always has a direct line to at least one user — himself or herself. For example, Buffer, a service for
posting updates to social networks, was inspired by its founder’s insightful observations of his own
behavior.
Buffer was founded in 2010 and is now used by over 1.1 million people.
[cxxxii] Its founder, Joel
Gascoigne, described the company’s inception in an interview.
[cxxxiii] “The idea for Buffer came to me
after I had been using Twitter for about 1.5 years. I had started to share links to blog posts and quotes
I found inspiring, and I found that my followers seemed to really like these types of tweets. I would
often get retweets or end up having a great conversation around the blog post or quote. That's when I
decided I wanted to share this kind of content more frequently, because the conversations being
triggered were allowing me to be in touch with some super smart and interesting people.”
Gascoigne continues, “So, with my goal of sharing more blog posts and quotes, I started to do it
manually. I quickly realized that it would be far more efficient to schedule these tweets for the future,
so I started to use a few available Twitter clients to do this. The key pain I ran into here was that I
would have to choose the exact date and time for the tweet, and in reality all I wanted to do was to
tweet ‘five times per day.’ I just wanted the tweets to be spread out so I didn't share them all at the
same time when I did my daily reading. For a while, I used a notepad and kept track of when I had
scheduled tweets, so that I could try and tweet five times per day. This became quite cumbersome,
and so my idea was born: I wanted to make scheduling tweets 'x times a day' as easy as tweeting
regularly.”
Gascoigne’s story is a classic example of a founder scratching his own itch. As he used existing
solutions, he recognized a discrepancy in what they offered and the solution he needed. He identified
where steps could be removed from other products he used and built a simpler way to get his job
done.
Careful introspection can uncover opportunities for building habit-forming products. As you go
about your day, ask yourself why you do, or do not do, certain things and how those tasks could be
made easier or more rewarding.
Observing your own behavior can inspire the next habit-forming product or inform a breakthrough
improvement to an existing solution. Below, you’ll find other hotbeds for innovation opportunities —
think of them as shortcuts for uncovering existing behaviors that are ripe for successful business
development based on forming new user habits.
Nascent Behaviors
Sometimes technologies that appear to cater to a niche will cross into the mainstream. Behaviors that
start with a small group of users can expand to a wider population, but only if they cater to a broad
need. However, the fact that the technology is at first used only by a small population often deceives
observers into dismissing the product's true potential.

A striking number of world-changing innovations were written off as mere novelties with limited
commercial appeal. George Eastman’s Brownie camera, preloaded with a film roll and selling for
just $1, was originally marketed as a child’s toy.
[cxxxiv] Established studio photographers saw the device
as little more than a cheap plaything.
The invention of the telephone was also dismissed at first. Sir William Preece, the chief engineer
of the British Post Office famously declared, "The Americans have need of the telephone, but we do
not. We have plenty of messenger boys."
[cxxxv]
In 1911, Ferdinand Foch the future Commander-in-Chief of the Allied Armies in WWI said,
"Airplanes are interesting toys but of no military value."
[cxxxvi]
In 1957, the editor of business books for Prentice Hall told his publisher, “I have traveled the
length and breadth of this country and talked with the best people, and I can assure you that data
processing is a fad that won't last out the year.”
The Internet itself, and each successive wave of innovation, has continually received criticism for
its inability to gain mass appeal. In 1995, Clifford Stoll wrote a Newsweek article titled, “The
Internet? Bah!” where he declared, “The truth is no online database will replace your daily
newspaper…” Stoll continued, “...we’ll soon buy books and newspapers straight over the Internet.
Uh, sure.”
[cxxxvii]
But of course, now we do read books and newspapers over the Internet. When technologies are
new, people are often skeptical. Old habits die hard and few people have the foresight to see how
new innovations will eventually change their routines. However, by looking to early adopters who
have already developed nascent behaviors, entrepreneurs and designers can identify niche use cases,
which can be taken mainstream.
For example, in its early days, Facebook was only used by Harvard students. The service
mimicked an offline behavior familiar to all college students at the time: Perusing a printed book of
student faces and profiles. After finding popularity at Harvard, Facebook rolled out to other Ivy
League schools, and then, to college students nationwide. Next came high school kids and later,
employees at select companies. Finally, in September of 2006, Facebook was opened to the world.
Today, Facebook is used by over a billion people. What first began as a nascent behavior at one
campus became a global phenomenon catering to the fundamental human need for connection to
others.
As discussed early in the book, many habit-forming technologies begin as “vitamins” — nice-to-
have products that, over time, become must-have “painkillers” by relieving an itch or pain.  It is
revealing that so many breakthrough technologies and companies, from airplanes to Airbnb, were at
first dismissed by critics as toys or niche markets. Looking for nascent behaviors among early
adopters can often uncover valuable new business opportunities.
Enabling Technologies
Mike Maples, Jr., a Silicon Valley “super angel” investor, likens technology to big-wave surfing. In
2012, Maples blogged, “In my experience, every decade or so, we see a major new tech wave.  When
I was in high school, it was the PC revolution. I made my career as an entrepreneur at the end of the
client/server wave and in the early phases of the Internet wave. Today, we are at the mass adoption
phase of the social networking wave. I am obsessed with these technology waves and have spent a lot
of time studying how they develop and what patterns can be observed.”
Maples believes technology waves follow a three-phase pattern, “They start with infrastructure.

Advances in infrastructure are the preliminary forces that enable a large wave to gather. As the wave
begins to gather, enabling technologies and platforms create the basis for new types of applications
that cause a gathering wave to achieve massive penetration and customer adoption. Eventually, these
waves crest and subside, making way for the next gathering wave to take shape.”
[cxxxviii]
Entrepreneurs looking for windows of opportunity would be wise to consider Maples’ metaphor.
Wherever new technologies suddenly make a behavior easier, new possibilities are born. Oftentimes,
the creation of a new infrastructure opens up unforeseen ways to make other actions simpler or more
rewarding. For example, the Internet was first made possible because of the infrastructure
commissioned by the United States government during the Cold War. Then, enabling technologies
such as dial-up modems, and later, high-speed Internet connections, provided access to the web. And
finally, HTML, web browsers and search engines — the application layer — made browsing
possible on the World Wide Web. At each successive stage, previous enabling technologies allowed
new behaviors and businesses to flourish.
Identifying areas where a new technology makes cycling through the Hook Model faster, more
frequent, or more rewarding provides fertile ground for developing new habit-forming products.
Interface Change
Technological changes often create opportunities to build new hooks. However, sometimes no
technology change is required. Many companies have found success in driving new habit formation by
identifying how changing user interactions can create new routines.
Whenever a massive change occurs in the way people interact with technology, expect to find
plenty of opportunities ripe for harvesting. Changes in interface suddenly make all sorts of behaviors
easier. Subsequently, when the effort required to accomplish an action decreases, usage tends to
explode.
A long history of technology businesses made their fortunes discovering behavioral secrets made
visible because of a change in the interface. Apple and Microsoft succeeded by turning clunky
terminals into graphical user interfaces accessible by mainstream consumers. Google simplified the
search interface as compared to those of ad-heavy and difficult-to-use competitors such as Yahoo!
and Lycos. Facebook and Twitter turned new behavioral insights into interfaces that simplified social
interactions online. In each case, a new interface made an action easier and uncovered surprising
truths about user behaviors.
More recently, Instagram and Pinterest have capitalized on behavioral insights brought about by
interface changes. Pinterest’s ability to create a rich canvas of images — utilizing what were then
cutting-edge interface changes — revealed new insights about the addictive nature of an online
catalog. For Instagram, the interface change was cameras integrated into smartphones. Instagram
discovered that its low-tech filters made relatively poor-quality smartphone photos look great.
Suddenly taking good pictures with your phone was easier and Instagram used its newly discovered
insights to recruit an army of rabidly snapping users. With both Pinterest and Instagram, tiny teams
generated huge value — not by cracking hard technical challenges, but by solving common interaction
problems. Likewise, the fast ascent of mobile devices, including tablets, has spawned a new
revolution in interface changes — and a new generation of startup products and services designed
around mobile user needs and behaviors.
To uncover where interfaces are changing, Paul Buchheit, Partner at Y-Combinator, encourages
entrepreneurs to “live in the future.”
[cxxxix] A profusion of interface changes are just a few years away.
Wearable technologies like Google Glass, the Oculus Rift virtual reality goggles, and the Pebble

watch promise to change how users interact with the real and digital worlds. By looking forward to
anticipate where interfaces will change, the enterprising designer can uncover new ways to form user
habits.
***
Remember and Share
- The Hook Model helps the product designer generate an initial prototype for a habit-forming
technology. It also helps uncover potential weaknesses in an existing product’s habit-forming
potential.
- Once a product is built, Habit Testing helps uncover product devotees, discover which product
elements are habit forming (if any), and why those aspects of your product change user behavior.
Habit Testing includes three steps: identify, codify, and modify.
- First, dig into the data to identify how people are behaving and using the product.
- Next, codify these findings in search of habitual users. To generate new hypotheses, study the
actions and paths taken by devoted users.
- Lastly, modify the product to influence more users to follow the same path as your habitual
users, and then evaluate results and continue to modify as needed.
- Keen observation of one's own behavior can lead to new insights and habit-forming product
opportunities.
- Identifying areas where a new technology makes cycling through the Hook Model faster, more
frequent or more rewarding provides fertile ground for developing new habit-forming products.
- Nascent behaviors — new behaviors that few people see or do, and yet ultimately fulfill a
mass-market need — can inform future breakthrough habit-forming opportunities.
- New interfaces lead to transformative behavior change and business opportunities.
***
Do This Now
Refer to the answers you came up with in the “Do This Now” section in chapter five to complete the
following exercises:
- Perform Habit Testing, as described in this chapter, to identify the steps users take toward
long-term engagement.
- Be aware of your behaviors and emotions for the next week as you use everyday products. Ask
yourself:
- What triggered me to use these products? Was I prompted externally or through internal
means?
- Am I using these products as intended?
- How might these products improve their on-boarding funnels, re-engage users through
additional external triggers, or encourage users to invest in their services?
- Speak with three people outside your social circle to discover which apps occupy the first
screen on their mobile devices. Ask them to use these apps as they normally would and see if you
uncover any unnecessary or nascent behaviors.
- Brainstorm five new interfaces that could introduce opportunities or threats to your business.


APPENDIX

NOW WHAT?
 
Thank you for investing in this book. Now that you have read it, let me hear from you!
Please take a moment to review the book on Amazon (http://www.amazon.com/dp/B00HJ4A43S)
and Goodreads (http://goo.gl/UBHeLY).
Also, be sure to visit my blog (NirAndFar.com) to learn more about habit-forming products and
receive my latest essays.
Finally, please send questions, comments, edits, or feedback to: nir@nirandfar.com.

ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Nir Eyal writes, consults, and teaches about the intersection of psychology, technology, and business.
He is an advisor to several Bay Area startups, venture capital firms, and incubators. Since 2003, Nir
has founded two technology companies. His most recent startup received venture funding from
Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers. Nir has lectured at the Stanford Graduate School of Business and
the Hasso Plattner Institute of Design at Stanford. His writing appears in The Atlantic, Harvard
Business Review, Forbes, Psychology Today, TechCrunch, and his blog, NirAndFar.com. Nir
attended the Stanford Graduate School of Business and Emory University.
Ryan Hoover is a writer and observer of product trends, growth, and behavior design with essays
featured in Forbes, Fast Company, The Next Web, and PandoDaily. Ryan was the Director of
Product at PlayHaven, a business engine for mobile game developers. He is the co-creator of Product
Hunt, a daily leaderboard for new products, and is an Instructor at Tradecraft, a 12-week program
training startup talent.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
 
If I am ever asked, “What was the most surprising thing you learned while writing this book?,” I
won’t respond with any of the research studies or company examples you’ve read. Although the topic
has captivated me for over two and a half years, there can only be one answer to this question: I never
knew how generous people could be.
I owe a particular debt of gratitude to the following people. This book truly would not have been
possible without them.
Michelle Ahronovitz, Stephen Anderson, Dan Ariely, Jess Bachman, Gil Ben-Artzy, Laura
Bergheim, Michal Bortnik, Vlada Bortnik, Jonathan Bolden, Ramsay Brown, Tim Chang, James
Cham, Andrew Chen, Sangeet Paul Choudary, Steve Corcoran, Alex Cowan, John Dailey, Tanna
Drapkin, Karen Dulski, Scott Dunlap, Eric Eldon, Josh Elman, Jasmine Eyal, Monique Eyal, Ofir
Eyal, Omer Eyal, Ronit Eyal, Victor Eyal, Andrew Feiler, Christy Fletcher, BJ Fogg, Janice Fraser,
Jason Fraser, Shuly Galili, Ben Gardner, Kelly Greenwood, Bobby Greunwald, Jonathan Guerrera,
Austin Gunter, Steph Habif, Leslie Harlson, Stephen Houghton, Jason Hreha, Gabriela Hromis, Peter
Jackson, Noah Kagan, Dave Kashen, Amy Jo Kim, John Kim, Michael Kim, David King, Thomas
Kjemperud, Tristan Kromer, Rok Krulec, Michal Levin, Jonathan Libov, Chuck Longanecker and the
team at Digital Telepathy, Jennifer Lu, Wayne Lue, Jules Maltz, Zack Marom, Dave McClure, Kelly
McGonigal, Sarah Melnyk, Oreon Mounter and the team at MomentCo.com, Matt Mullenweg, Yash
Nelapati, David Ngo, Thomas O’Duffy, Max Ogles, Amy O’Leary, Line Oma, Alex Osterwalder,
Trevor Owens, Brett Redinger, Sharbani Roy, Gretchen Rubin, Lisa Rutherford, Kate Rutter, Paul
Sas, Todd Sattersten, Travis Sentell, Bhavin Shah, Hiten Shah, Jason Shen, Baba Shiv, Paul Singh,
Katja Spreckelmeyer, Jon Stone, Nisha Sudarsanam, Lydia Sugarman, Tim Sullivan, Tracey Sullivan,
Guy Vincent, Jeff Waldstreicher, Charles Wang, AnneMarie Ward, Stephen Wendell, Mark
Williamson, David Wolfe, Colin Zhu, Gabe Zichermann
There are two more people who deserve extra recognition: First, Ryan Hoover, the Contributing
Author, was instrumental in helping me turn a jumble of blog posts and writing scraps into a cohesive
book. His dedication to this project, writing talent, and dogged persistence made the idea of this book
a reality. I am sure the world will be hearing much more from Ryan in the years to come and I feel
fortunate to have worked with him early in his career.
Next, this book is dedicated to my wife Julie Li-Eyal. Julie assisted with everything, from practical
tasks (such as designing the book cover and presentation slides) to serving as a sounding board during
the ups and downs of the writing process. However, of all her contributions, the greatest is her
unwavering support. Her endless affection leaves me forever in her debt and always wondering how I
got so lucky.

CONTRIBUTORS
 
Thank you to the loyal blog subscribers who provided insightful feedback, careful edits, moral
support, and gentle prodding.
The people listed on the following pages donated their time and insights to improving this book. I
am in awe of their willingness to contribute to making this book what it is.
Shira Abel
Ashita Achuthan
Géraldine Adams
Buki Adeniji
Anuj Adhiya
Akash Agarwal
Michael Agnich
Payam Ahangar
Charles Ajidahun
Bashar Al-Nakhala
Adi Alhadeff
Colt Alton
Dina Amin
Preet Anand
Margaret Ancobiah
Ravikiran Annaswamy
Lauri Antalainen
Nikola Arabadjiev
Steve Arnold
Conall Arora
George Arutyunyan
Sunil Arvindam
Eldad Askof
Taimur Aslam
Nadya Averkieva
Mark Avnet
Hazem Awad
Paul Baccaro
Deepak Baid
Gary Baker
Courtney Baker
Paul Ballas
Jennifer Baloian
Naren Bansal
Jenny Barnes

Anat Baron
Matthew Barry
Neal Battaglia
Brian Bell
Simon Bentholm
Tim Benwell
Hampus Bergqvist
Brian Bettendorf
Ajay Bharadwaj
Maggie Biggs
Brad Birt
Justin Blanchard
Jim Bloedau
Sean Boisen
Jason Brady
Johan Brand
Jamie Bresner
Ramsay Brown
Robert Brown
Sarah E. Brown
Brendan Brown
Piotr Bucki
Ella Buitenman
Josip Bujas
Gabriela Cándano Herbas
Marica Caposaldo
Christopher Carfi
Jon Carr-Harris
Kevin Carroll
Giuseppe Catalfamo
Yoonji Chae
Ora Chaiken
Jacky Chan
Dennis Chandler
Kathy Chang
Stephen Chang
Geeta Chauhan
Sylvia Chebi
Zhongning Chen
Lucy Chen
Frank Chen
Chikodi Chima
Vivek Chopra
Sangeet Paul Choudary
Scott Christ

Yannis Christopoulos
Eugene Chuvyrov
Fran Civile
Gillian Clowes
Armin Čobo
Victor Colombo
Jim Conaghan
Esteban Contreras
Jacob Cook
Justin Copeland
Maxime Cormier
Ben Cote
Sylvia Creswell
Hana Crume
Andrian Cucu
Steve Cunningham
Antonio D'souza
Diogo da Silva
Steven Daar
Hadiyah Daché
Chad Dahlstrom
David Datny
Deeti Dave
David Davenport-Firth
Detrick DeBurr
Bart Denny
Shai Desai
Simren S. Dhaliwal
Cassius Dhelon
CASUDI aka Caroline Di Diego
António Dias
Andre Dickson
Andrew Didenko
Shawn Dimantha
Peter Dimitrov
Richard Dinerman
Florian Disson
Nolan Dubeau
Denise Duffy
Scott Dunlap
Arkadiusz Dymalski
Lars Eickmeier
André Eilertsen
Eyal Eldar
Dagur Eyjolfsson

Kingsley Ezejiaku
Fred Farnam
Pierre-Emile Faroult
Jack Farrell
Lloyd Fassett
Mijael Feldman
Yoel Feldman
Francesco Ferrazzino
Tony Fish
David Flemate
Keith Fleming
Joel Frisch
Timo Fritsche
Kaoru Fujita
Benjamin Gadbaw
Uli Gal-Oz
Hari Ganapathy
Amir Ganjeii
Magne Matre Gåsland
Meghbartma Gautam
Melissa Gena
Sigal Geshury
Sajad Ghanizada
Drew Gierach
Endri Gjinushi
Anshu Goel
Ming Gong
Pedro L. González
Jason Grace
Charlie Gragam
David Gratton
Ravishankar Gundlapalli
Abhishek Gupta
Michael Haberman
Steph Habif
Rob Hall
Hadas Hamerovv
Albert Hartman
Ebrahim-Khalil Hassen
Eva Hasson
Chris Hawley
Mark Hayes
Elisa Heiken
Alfan Hendro
Benjamin Hoffman

Ryan Holdeman
Jason Holderness
Bob Holling
Joakim Holmquist
Kyle Homstead
Rahul Horé
Jonathan Hoss
Patrick Huitema
Matt Hurley
Nigel Ingham
Christos Iosifidis
Jan Isakovic
Yair Itzhaik
Ranjan Jagannathan
Javid Jamae
Kyle Jaster
Anandan Jayaraman
Eoghan Jennings
Amit Joshipura
Jonathan Kalinowski
Michael Kampff
Dave Kashen
Joshua Keay
Chandra Keith
Jason Kende
Gary Kind
Jason King
Ed King
Marcia Kinstler
Thomas Kjemperud
Michael Klazema
Tobias Kluge
Russ Klusas
Kathleen Knopoff
Felix Köbler
Vadim Komisarchik
R George Komoto
Jonathan Korn
Ravi Kotichintala
Mohammed Kromah
Charlie Kubal
Vineesh Kumar
Chris Kurdziel
Tim Kutnick
Brooks Lambert

Brian Lance
Betsy Lane
Norman Law
Vinney Le
Sebastien Le Tuan
Cody Lee
Rudi Leismann
Stephanie Lenorovitz
Andrew Levy
Anson Liang
Marvin Liao
Roland Ligtenberg
Eyal Livne
Tobias Loerracher
Jenn Lonzer
Jeff Lougheed
Jennifer Lu
Paul Lucas
Waynn Lue
Ricardo Luevanos Jr
Ivan Lukianchuk
Pavan Lulla
Morten Lundsby
Darren Luvaas
Amanda MacArthur
Murray Macdonald
Churchill Madyavanhu
Jay Chuck Mailen
Solene Maitre
Wes Maldonado
Stanislav Maleshkov
Craig Mankelow
Armando Mann
Alexander Manolov
Jerad Maplethorpe
Angelos Marantos
Ivan Markovic
Leon Markovitz
Alon Matas
Chris Mathew
Jonathan Matus
Sunil Maulik
Gavin McDermott
Michael McGee
Jon McGee

Gilberto Medrano
Alfons Mencke
Aadesh Midtry
Christopher Miles
Greg Miliatis
Sophie-Charlotte Moatti
Lindsey Moav
Joe Mocquant
Pranoy Modi
Peter Monien
Aaron Moore
Thomas Morselt
Kareem Mostafa
Jodie Moule
Olivia Muesse
Tim Mukata
Noel Mulkeen
Lee Munroe
Neil Murray
Nikhil Nadkarni
Szabolcs Nagy
Nitya Narasimhan
Amaan Nathoo
Basanth Kumar Neeli
Errol Nezar
Vas Nikolaev
Dawn Novarina
Thomas O'Duffy
Neal O'Gorman
Sean O'Leary
Seyi Ogunyemi
Oli Olsen
Steve Omohundro
Kevin Ondyak
Alfredo Osorio
Ambika Pajjuri
Peter Pallotta
Hesam Panahi
Felipe Escanilla Panza
Petar Papikj
Juan Paredes
Lance Parker
Devang Patel
Nipul Patel
Randy Paynter

Allan Pedersen
Paolo Perazzo
Gary Percy
Igal Perelman
Daniele Peron
Nicholas Peterson
Jean-Baptiste Pin
Stephan Plesnik
Justin Pollard
Vera Polyakova
Eike Post
Dr. Eike Berend Post
Gilles Poupardin
Chris Pousset
Gee Powell
Mikhail Pozin
Julie Price
Amala Putrevu
Maniappan R
Christian Raaby
Moshik Raccah
Cyrus Radfar
Sanjay Radhakrishnan
Brett Radlicki
Claudine Felice Ramirez
Umesh Rangappa
Ritesh Ranjan
Tore Rasmussen
Zoheb Raza
Christi Reid
Ophir Reshef
Kamil Rextin
Justin Reyes
Steve Rigell
Edson Rigonatti
Billy Robins
Lior Romano
Johann Romefort
Shai Rosen
Megan Rounds
Mark Rowland
Steve Rowling
Leon Rubinstein
Emily Ryan
Ari Salomon

Oren Samari
Julius Sapoka
Steven Saunders
Sid Savara
Adele Savarese
Amol Saxena
Matt Schaar
Rick Schaefer
Charles Schaefer
Miranda Schenkel
Nati Mark Schlesinger
Willemijn Schmitz
Johannes Schneider
Jason Schwartz
Joel Scott
Adrian Scott
Mark Sefaradi
Cameron Sepah
Sharad Seth
Rajesh Setty
Francisco Sevillano
Bhavin Shah
Sarah Shaiq
Aviv Shalgi
Yaron Shapira
Neeraj Sharma
Priya Sheth
Kevin Shin
Timothy Shipman
John Shoffner
Barak Shragai
Michael Siepmann
Diogo Silva
Michael Simpson
Raj Singh
Navarjun Singh
Rachna Singh
Indra Singhal
Chris Sluz
Dana Smith
Nick Soman
Matthew Sonier
Adam Sowers
Jonathan Squires
Karthik Srinivasan

John Starmer
Slobodan Stipic
Aleksandar Stojanovic
Dave Stone
Nisha Sudarsanam
Lydia Sugarman
Mike Summerfield
Andreas Sutharia
Brent Taggart
Itai Talmi
Dixit Talwar
Michael Tame
Norman Tan
Eva Tang
Ali Rushdan Tariq
John Thompson
Bob Thordarson
Brenton Thornicroft
Barbara Tien
Amir Toister
Jacqueline Tomko
Andrea Torino Rodriguez
Raul Troyo
Steph Tryphonas
Rattapoom Tuchinda
Oji Udezue
Cristobal Undurraga
Adriana Ursache
Haruna Usman
Branislav Vajagić
Paul Valcheff
Joeri Vankeirsbilck
Tim Varner
Ashwanth Vemulapalli
René Vendrig
Francisco Vieyra
Alberto Villa
Guy Vincent
Khuong Vo Thanh
Marcus Vorwaller
Todd Wahnish
Akane Wakasugi
Karl Waldman
AnneMarie Ward
Mark Warren

Alan Weinkrant
Jay Weintraub
Stephen Wendel
Erik Wesslen
Albert Wieringa
Denis Wilson
Rick Winfield
Melinda Wiria
Reggie Wirjadi
Vanita Wolf
Nathanael Wolfe
Lyon Wong
Margo Wright
Renee Yarbrough
Dean Young
Beverley Zabow
Danny Zagorski
Danny Zagorski
Hasnain Zaheer
Cindy Ris Zanca
Xin Zhou
Julie Zilber
Tal Zilberman
Keivan Zolfaghari
Zoran Zuber

NOTES AND SOURCES

Introduction
[i] “IDC-Facebook Always Connected.pdf - File Shared from Box.” Accessed December 19, 2013.
https://fb-public.app.box.com/s/3iq5x6uwnqtq7ki4q8wk.
[ii] “Survey Finds One-Third of Americans More Willing to Give Up Sex Than Their Mobile
Phones.” Accessed December 19, 2013. http://www.telenav.com/about/pr-summer-travel/report-
20110803.html.
[iii] Oulasvirta, Antti, Tye Rattenbury, Lingyi Ma, and Eeva Raita. “Habits Make Smartphone Use
More Pervasive.” Personal Ubiquitous Comput. 16, no. 1 (January 2012): 105–114.
doi:10.1007/s00779-011-0412-2.
[iv] Belic, Dusan, IntoMobile Thursday, February 9th, and 2012 at 12:50 AM. “Tomi Ahonen:
Average Users Looks at Their Phone 150 Times a Day!” IntoMobile. Accessed December 19, 2013.
http://www.intomobile.com/2012/02/09/tomi-ahonen-average-users-looks-their-phone-150-times-
day/.
[v]  Morsella E, Bargh JA, Gollwitzer PM (eds) (2008) Oxford handbook of human action. Oxford
University Press, Oxford.
[vi] For purposes of this book, I use the definition of habit formation as the process of learning new
behaviors through repetition until they become automatic. I am grateful to Dr. Stephen Wendel for
pointing out the spectrum of habits. For a framework describing other automatic behaviors see:
Bargh, John A. “The Four Horsemen of Automaticity: Awareness, Intention, Efficiency, and Control
in Social Cognition.” In Handbook of Social Cognition, Vol. 1:  Basic Processes; Vol. 2: 
Applications (2nd Ed.), edited by R. S. Wyer and T. K. Srull, 1–40. Hillsdale,  NJ,  England:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc, 1994.
[vii] Verplanken, Bas, and Wendy Wood. “Interventions to Break and Create Consumer Habits.”
Journal of Public Policy & Marketing 25, no. 1 (March 2006): 90–103. doi:10.1509/jppm.25.1.90.
[viii] Wood W, Neal DT (2007) A new look at habits and the habit-goal interface. Psychol Rev
114(4):843–863[viii].
[ix] “Pinterest.” Wikipedia, the Free Encyclopedia, December 21, 2013.
http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pinterest&oldid=587088493.
[x]  “What Causes Behavior Change?.” BJ Fogg’s Behavior Model. Accessed November 12, 2013.
http://www.behaviormodel.org/.
[xi] Robert Sapolsky: Are Humans Just Another Primate? Accessed December 19, 2013.
http://fora.tv/2011/02/15/Robert_Sapolsky_Are_Humans_Just_Another_Primate.
[xii] Brevers, Damien, and Xavier Noël. “Pathological Gambling and the Loss of Willpower: A
Neurocognitive Perspective.” Socioaffective Neuroscience & Psychology 3, no. 0 (September 26,
2013). doi:10.3402/snp.v3i0.21592.
[xiii] “The Acceleration of Addictiveness,” Paul Graham. Accessed November 12, 2013.
http://www.paulgraham.com/addiction.html.
[xiv] “Night of the Living Dead.” Wikipedia, the Free Encyclopedia, December 18, 2013.
http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Night_of_the_Living_Dead&oldid=586570022.
[xv] Thaler, Richard H., Cass R. Sunstein, and John P. Balz. Choice Architecture. SSRN Scholarly
Paper. Rochester, NY: Social Science Research Network, April 2, 2010.
http://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=1583509.
[xvi] For a memorable acronym of the Hook Model, think “ATARI”, as in the 1980s video gaming
console. “A hook has four parts: Trigger, Action, Reward, and Investment.

Chapter 1: The Habit Zone
[xvii] Wood, Wendy, Jeffrey M Quinn, and Deborah A Kashy. “Habits in Everyday Life: Thought,
Emotion, and Action.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 83, no. 6 (December 2002):
1281–1297.
[xviii] Yin, Henry H., and Barbara J. Knowlton. “The Role of the Basal Ganglia in Habit Formation.”
Nature Reviews Neuroscience 7, no. 6 (June 2006): 464–476. doi:10.1038/nrn1919.
[xix] Dickinson, A. & Balleine, B. (2002) The role of learning in the operation of motivational
systems. In Gallistel, C.R. (ed.), Stevens’ Handbook of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Motivation, and Emotion. Wiley and Sons, New York, pp. 497–534.
[xx] “Notes from 2005 Berkshire Hathaway Annual Meeting” Tilson Funds. Accessed November 12,
2013. http://www.tilsonfunds.com/brkmtg05notes.pdf
[xxi] “Mungerisms: Charlie Munger: Turning $2 Million Into $2 Trillion.” Mungerisms. Accessed
November 12, 2013. http://mungerisms.blogspot.com/2010/04/charlie-munger-turning-2-million-into-
2.html.
[xxii] “Candy Crush: So Popular It’s Killing King’s IPO?” Yahoo Finance. Accessed December 16,
2013. http://finance.yahoo.com/blogs/the-exchange/candy-crush-so-popular-it-s-smashing-interest-in-
an-ipo-160523940.html.
[xxiii] “Evernote: ‘The Longer You Use It, the More Likely You Are to Pay’.” CNET. Accessed
November 12, 2013. http://news.cnet.com/8301-30685_3-57339139-264/evernote-the-longer-you-
use-it-the-more-likely-you-are-to-pay/.
[xxiv] Freedman, David H. “Say Hello to Your New Brain.” Inc.com. Accessed November 14, 2013.
http://www.inc.com/magazine/201112/evernote-2011-company-of-the-year.html.
[xxv] Skok, David. “Lessons Learned – Viral Marketing.” For Entrepreneurs. Accessed November
12, 2013. http://www.forentrepreneurs.com/lessons-learnt-viral-marketing/.
[xxvi] Gourville, John T. “Eager Sellers and Stony Buyers: Understanding the Psychology of New-
Product Adoption.” Accessed November 12, 2013. http://hbr.org/product/eager-sellers-and-stony-
buyers-understanding-the-p/an/R0606F-PDF-ENG.
[xxvii] Adams, Cecil. “Was the QWERTY Keyboard Purposely Designed to Slow Typists?,”
October 30, 1981. http://www.straightdope.com/columns/read/221/was-the-qwerty-keyboard-
purposely-designed-to-slow-typists
[xxviii] Bouton, Mark E. “Context and Behavioral Processes in Extinction.” Learning & Memory 11,
no. 5 (September 1, 2004): 485–494. doi:10.1101/lm.78804.
[xxix] Kirshenbaum, Ari P., Darlene M. Olsen, and Warren K. Bickel. “A Quantitative Review of the
Ubiquitous Relapse Curve.” Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment 36, no. 1 (January 2009): 8–17.
doi:10.1016/j.jsat.2008.04.001.
[xxx] Jeffery, Robert W., Leonard H. Epstein, G. Terence, Adam Drewnowski, Albert J. Stunkard,
and Rena R. Wing. “Long-term Maintenance of Weight Loss: Current Status.” Health Psychology 19,
no. 1, Suppl (2000): 5–16. doi:10.1037/0278-6133.19.Suppl1.5.
[xxxi] Duhigg, Charles. The Power of Habit: Why We Do What We Do in Life and Business. New
York: Random House, 2012. p 20.
[xxxii] Judah, G., B. Gardner, and R. Aunger. “Forming a Flossing Habit: An Exploratory Study of
the Psychological Determinants of Habit Formation.” British Journal of Health Psychology 18 (2013):
338–353.
[xxxiii] “Bing Your Brain: Test, Then Test Again.” Accessed December 16, 2013.
http://www.bing.com/blogs/site_blogs/b/search/archive/2013/02/06/bing-your-brain-test-then-test-

again.aspx
[xxxiv] “comScore Releases September 2013 U.S. Search Engine Rankings.” comScore, Inc.
Accessed November 12, 2013.
http://www.comscore.com/Insights/Press_Releases/2013/10/comScore_Releases_September_2013_U
[xxxv] “Amazon Product Ads” Amazon. Accessed November 12, 2013.
http://services.amazon.com/content/product-ads-on-amazon.htm/ref=as_left_pads_apa1#!how-it-
works
[xxxvi] Trifts, Valerie, and Gerald Häubl. “Information Availability and Consumer Preference: Can
Online Retailers Benefit from . . .” In Journal of Consumer Psychology, 149–159, 2003.
[xxxvii] “More Retailers at Risk of Amazon ‘Showrooming’.” Bits Blog. Accessed December 16,
2013. http://bits.blogs.nytimes.com/2013/02/27/more-retailers-at-risk-of-amazon-showrooming/.
[xxxviii] Stone, Brad. The Everything Store: Jeff Bezos and the Age of Amazon. Little, Brown and
Company, 2013.
[xxxix] Lally, Phillippa, Cornelia H. M. van Jaarsveld, Henry W. W. Potts, and Jane Wardle. “How
Are Habits Formed: Modelling Habit Formation in the Real World.” European Journal of Social
Psychology 40, no. 6 (2010): 998–1009. doi:10.1002/ejsp.674.
[xl] Offit, Paul A. “Don’t Take Your Vitamins.” The New York Times, June 8, 2013, sec. Opinion /
Sunday Review. http://www.nytimes.com/2013/06/09/opinion/sunday/dont-take-your-vitamins.html.
Chapter 2: Trigger
[xli] Accessed November 12, 2013. http://instagram.com/press/
[xlii] Perlroth, Somini Sengupta, Nicole, and Jenna Wortham. “Instagram Founders Were Helped by
Bay Area Connections.” The New York Times, April 13, 2012, sec. Technology.
http://www.nytimes.com/2012/04/14/technology/instagram-founders-were-helped-by-bay-area-
connections.html.
[xliii] “Twitter ‘Tried to Buy Instagram before Facebook’.” Telegraph.co.uk, April 16, 2012, sec.
twitter. http://www.telegraph.co.uk/technology/twitter/9206312/Twitter-tried-to-buy-Instagram-
before-Facebook.html.
[xliv] Schwartz, Barry. The Paradox of Choice. New York: ECCO, 2004.
[xlv] Masters, Blake. “Blakemasters.com.” Peter Thiel’s CS183: Startup - Class 2 Notes Essay,
April 6, 2012. http://blakemasters.com/post/20582845717/peter-thiels-cs183-startup-class-2-notes-
essay.
[xlvi] Katikalapudi, R., S. Chellappan, F. Montgomery, D. Wunsch, and K. Lutzen. “Associating
Internet Usage with Depressive Behavior Among College Students.” IEEE Technology and Society
Magazine 31, no. 4 (2012): 73–80. doi:10.1109/MTS.2012.2225462.
[xlvii] Chellappan, Sriram, and Raghavendra Kotikalapudi. “How Depressed People Use the
Internet.” The New York Times, June 15, 2012, sec. Opinion / Sunday Review.
http://www.nytimes.com/2012/06/17/opinion/sunday/how-depressed-people-use-the-internet.html.
[xlviii] “Twitter Founder Reveals Secret Formula for Getting Rich Online | Wired Business |
Wired.com.” Wired Business. Accessed November 12, 2013.
http://www.wired.com/business/2013/09/ev-williams-xoxo/.
[xlix] “How the ‘Failure’ Culture of Startups Is Killing Innovation | Wired Opinion | Wired.com.”
Wired Opinion. Accessed November 12, 2013. http://www.wired.com/opinion/2013/09/why-do-
research-when-you-can-fail-fast-pivot-and-act-out-other-popular-startup-cliches/.
[l] “The Power of User Narratives: Jack Dorsey (Square).” Video. Entrepreneurial Thought Leaders

Lecture. Stanford University, 2011. http://ecorner.stanford.edu/authorMaterialInfo.html?mid=2644.
[li] “What is Customer Development.” Startup Lessons Learned by Eric Reis. Accessed November
12, 2013. http://www.startuplessonslearned.com/2008/11/what-is-customer-development.html
[lii] “Empathy Map.” The k12 Lab Wiki. Accessed November 12, 2013. 
https://dschool.stanford.edu/groups/k12/wiki/3d994/Empathy_Map.html
[liii] “5 Whys.” Wikipedia, the Free Encyclopedia, November 12, 2013.
http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=5_Whys&oldid=581315459.
[liv] For more on the need for social belonging, see: Fiske, Susan T. Social Beings: a Core Motives
Approach to Social Psychology. Hoboken, NJ: J. Wiley, 2010.
Chapter 3: Action
[lv] “What Causes Behavior Change?.” BJ Fogg’s Behavior Model. Accessed November 12, 2013.
http://www.behaviormodel.org/
[lvi] Deci, Edward L., and Richard M. Ryan. “Self-determination Theory: A Macrotheory of Human
Motivation, Development, and Health.” Canadian Psychology/Psychologie Canadienne 49, no. 3
(2008): 182–185. doi:10.1037/a0012801.
[lvii] “Barack Obama ‘Hope’ Poster.” Wikipedia, the Free Encyclopedia, November 5, 2013.
http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?
title=Barack_Obama_%22Hope%22_poster&oldid=579742540.
[lviii] Hauptly, Denis J. Something Really New: Three Simple Steps to Creating Truly Innovative
Products. New York, NY u.a.: AMACOM, 2007.
[lix] “Twitter Founder Reveals Secret Formula for Getting Rich Online | Wired Business |
Wired.com.” Wired Business. Accessed November 12, 2013.
http://www.wired.com/business/2013/09/ev-williams-xoxo/.
[lx] Lunden, Ingrid. “Analyst: Twitter Passed 500M Users In June 2012, 140M Of Them In US;
Jakarta ‘Biggest Tweeting’ City.” TechCrunch. Accessed November 12, 2013.
http://techcrunch.com/2012/07/30/analyst-twitter-passed-500m-users-in-june-2012-140m-of-them-in-
us-jakarta-biggest-tweeting-city/.
[lxi]  “What Causes Behavior Change?.” BJ Fogg’s Behavior Model. Accessed November 12, 2013.
http://www.behaviormodel.org/
[lxii] Rao, Leena. “Twitter Seeing 90 Million Tweets Per Day, 25 Percent Contain Links.”
TechCrunch. Accessed November 12, 2013. http://techcrunch.com/2010/09/14/twitter-seeing-90-
million-tweets-per-day/.
[lxiii] Worchel, Stephen, Jerry Lee, and Akanbi Adewole. “Effects of Supply and Demand on Ratings
of Object Value.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 32, no. 5 (1975): 906–914.
doi:10.1037/0022-3514.32.5.906.
[lxiv] Weingarten, Gene. “Pearls Before Breakfast.” The Washington Post, April 8, 2007.
http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2007/04/04/AR2007040401721.html.
[lxv] Plassmann, Hilke, John O’Doherty, Baba Shiv, and Antonio Rangel. “Marketing Actions Can
Modulate Neural Representations of Experienced Pleasantness.” Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 105, no. 3 (January 22, 2008): 1050–1054. doi:10.1073/pnas.0706929105.
[lxvi] Nunes, Joseph, and Xavier Dreze. The Endowed Progress Effect: How Artificial Advancement
Increases Effort. SSRN Scholarly Paper. Rochester, NY: Social Science Research Network.
Accessed November 12, 2013. http://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=991962.
[lxvii] “List of Cognitive Biases.” Wikipedia, the Free Encyclopedia, November 12, 2013.

http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=List_of_cognitive_biases&oldid=581363450.
[lxviii] Anderson, Stephen P. Seductive Interaction Design: Creating Playful, Fun, and Effective User
Experiences. Berkeley, CA: New Riders, 2011.
Chapter 4: Variable Reward
[lxix] Olds, J., & Milner, P. (1954). Positive reinforcement produced by electrical stimulation of the
septal area and other regions of rat brain. Journal of Comparative and Physiological Psychology, 47,
419–427.
[lxx] Knutson, Brian, G Elliott Wimmer, Camelia M Kuhnen, and Piotr Winkielman. “Nucleus
Accumbens Activation Mediates the Influence of Reward Cues on Financial Risk Taking.”
Neuroreport 19, no. 5 (March 26, 2008): 509–513. doi:10.1097/WNR.0b013e3282f85c01.
[lxxi] Ramachandran, V. S. A Brief Tour of Human Consciousness: From Impostor Poodles to Purple
Numbers. New York: Pi Press, 2004.
[lxxii] Pessiglione, Mathias, Ben Seymour, Guillaume Flandin, Raymond J. Dolan, and Chris D.
Frith. “Dopamine-dependent Prediction Errors Underpin Reward-seeking Behaviour in Humans.”
Nature 442, no. 7106 (August 31, 2006): 1042–1045. doi:10.1038/nature05051.
[lxxiii] Ferster, Charles B, and Skinner. Schedules of Reinforcement. New York: Appleton-Century-
Crofts, 1957.
[lxxiv] Berns GS, McClure SM, Pagnoni G, Montague PR.. Predictability modulates human brain
response to reward" Journal of Neuroscience. 2001 Apr 15;21(8):2793-8.
[lxxv] Aharon, L., Etcoff, N., Ariely, D., CHabris, C. F., et al. Beautiful faces have variable reward
value: fMRI and behavioral evidence. Neuron 2001, 32, 357-551.
[lxxvi] A. Bandura, Social Foundations of Thought and Action: A Social Cognitive Theory.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1986.
[lxxvii] A. Bandura, Self-Efficacy: The Exercise of Self-Control. New York: W.H. Freeman, 1997.
[lxxviii] “Why Humanizing Players And Developers Is Crucial For League of Legends.” Accessed
November 12, 2013.
http://www.gamasutra.com/view/news/36847/Why_Humanizing_Players_And_Developers_Is_Crucia
[lxxix] “League of Legends: Changing Bad Player Behavior with Neuroscience.” Accessed
November 12, 2013.
http://www.gamasutra.com/view/news/178650/League_of_Legends_Changing_bad_player_behavior_
[lxxx] Milton, Katharine. “A Hypothesis to Explain the Role of Meat-eating in Human Evolution.”
Evolutionary Anthropology: Issues, News, and Reviews 8, no. 1 (1999): 11–21.
doi:10.1002/(SICI)1520-6505(1999)8:1<11::AID-EVAN6>3.0.CO;2-M.
[lxxxi] Jha, Alok, and science correspondent. “Stone Me! Spears Show Early Human Species Was
Sharper Than We Thought.” The Guardian, November 15, 2012, sec. Science.
http://www.theguardian.com/science/2012/nov/15/stone-spear-early-human-species.
[lxxxii] McKie, Robin, and science editor. “Humans Hunted for Meat 2 Million Years Ago.” The
Guardian, September 22, 2012, sec. Science.
http://www.theguardian.com/science/2012/sep/23/human-hunting-evolution-2million-years?
INTCMP=ILCNETTXT3487.
[lxxxiii] The Barefoot Professor: By Nature Video, 2010. http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7jrnj-
7YKZE&feature=youtube_gdata_player.
[lxxxiv] Rivlin, Gary. “Slot Machines for the Young and Active.” The New York Times, December
10, 2007, sec. Business. http://www.nytimes.com/2007/12/10/business/10slots.html.

[lxxxv] “Pinterest Does Another Massive Funding — $225 Million at $3.8 Billion Valuation
(Confirmed).” AllThingsD. Accessed November 12, 2013. http://allthingsd.com/20131023/pinterest-
does-another-massive-funding-225-million-at-3-8-billion-valuation/.
[lxxxvi]  Zeigarnik, B. (1927). Uber das Behalten yon erledigten und underledigten Handlungen.
Psychologische Forschung, 9, 1-85.
[lxxxvii] Deci, Edward L., and Richard M. Ryan. “Self-determination Theory: A Macrotheory of
Human Motivation, Development, and Health.” Canadian Psychology/Psychologie Canadienne 49, no.
3 (2008): 182–185. doi:10.1037/a0012801.
[lxxxviii] Tsotsis, Alexia, and Leena Rao. “Mailbox Cost Dropbox Around $100 Million.”
TechCrunch. Accessed November 29, 2013. http://techcrunch.com/2013/03/15/mailbox-cost-
dropbox-around-100-million/.
[lxxxix] "Quantcast Audience Profile for mahalo.com". Quantcast.com. Accessed June 19, 2010
(according to Jason Calacanis.” Wikipedia, the Free Encyclopedia, October 31, 2013.
http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Jason_Calacanis&oldid=579577057).
https://www.quantcast.com/mahalo.com
[xc] Cluley, Graham. “Creepy Quora Erodes Users’ Privacy, Reveals What You Have Read.” Naked
Security. Accessed December 1, 2013. http://nakedsecurity.sophos.com/2012/08/09/creepy-quora-
erodes-users-privacy-reveals-what-you-have-read/.
[xci] “Removing Feed Stories About Views.” Quora. Accessed November 12, 2013.
http://www.quora.com/permalink/gG922bywy.
[xcii] Carpenter, Christopher J. “A Meta-Analysis of the Effectiveness of the ‘But You Are Free’
Compliance-Gaining Technique.” Communication Studies 64, no. 1 (2013): 6–17.
doi:10.1080/10510974.2012.727941.
[xciii] Hamari, Juho. “Social Aspects Play an Important Role in Gamification.” Gamification
Research Network. Accessed November 13, 2013. http://gamification-research.org/2013/07/social-
aspects/.
[xciv] Adalian, Josef. “Breaking Bad Returns to Its Biggest Ratings Ever.” Vulture. Accessed
November 13, 2013. http://www.vulture.com/2013/08/breaking-bad-returns-to-its-biggest-ratings-
ever.html.
[xcv] “Breaking Bad Cooks up Record-breaking Formula for GUINNESS WORLD RECORDS 2014
Edition.” Accessed November 13, 2013.
http://www.guinnessworldrecords.com/news/2013/9/breaking-bad-cooks-up-record-breaking-
formula-for-guinness-world-records-2014-edition-51000/.
[xcvi] Kaufman, Geoff F, and Lisa K Libby. “Changing Beliefs and Behavior through Experience-
taking.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 103, no. 1 (July 2012): 1–19.
doi:10.1037/a0027525.
[xcvii] “CityVille Tops FarmVille’s Highest Peak Of Monthly Users.” SocialTimes. Accessed
November 13, 2013. http://socialtimes.com/cityville-tops-farmvilles-highest-peak-of-monthly-
users_b33272.
[xcviii] Zynga, Inc. 2011 Annual Report. San Francisco, CA. Filed February 28, 2012
[xcviii]http://investor.zynga.com/secfiling.cfm?filingID=1193125-12-85761&CIK=1439404
[xcix] Karmali, Luke. “Mists of Pandaria Pushes Warcraft Subs Over 10 Million.” IGN, October 4,
2012. http://www.ign.com/articles/2012/10/04/mists-of-pandaria-pushes-warcraft-subs-over-10-
million.

Chapter 5: Investment
[c] “Taiwan Teen Dies after Gaming for 40 Hours.” The Australian. Accessed November 13, 2013.
http://www.theaustralian.com.au/news/latest-news/taiwan-teen-dies-after-gaming-for-40-
hours/story-fn3dxix6-1226428437223.
[ci] Lord, James Gregory. The Raising of Money: 35 Essentials Trustees Are Using to Make a
Difference. Seattle, Wash.: New Futures Press, 2010.
[cii] Cialdini, Robert B. Influence: The Psychology of Persuasion. New York: HarperCollins, 2007.
[ciii] Norton, Michael I., Daniel Mochon, and Dan Ariely. The “IKEA Effect”: When Labor Leads to
Love. SSRN Scholarly Paper. Rochester, NY: Social Science Research Network, March 4, 2011.
http://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=1777100.
[civ] Freedman, J. L., & Fraser, S. C., Compliance Without Pressure: The foot-in-the-door technique,
JPSP, 1966, 4, 196-202
[cv] Jesse Schell @ DICE2010 (Part 2), 2010. http://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=pPfaSxU6jyY&feature=youtube_gdata_player.
[cvi] Fogg, BJ, & Nass, C. (1997) How users reciprocate to computers: an experiment that
demonstrates behavior change. In Proceedings of CHI 1997, ACM Press, 331-332.
[cvii] Libov, Jonathan. “On Bloomberg: ‘You Could Code Twitter in a Day. Then You’d Just Need to
Build the Network and Infrastructure.’ Didn’t Know It Was so Easy!” Microblog. @libovness,
November 7, 2013. https://twitter.com/libovness/status/398451464907259904.
[cviii] “Mobile App Analytics Show 26% of App Downloads Used One-time.” Localytics. Accessed
November 13, 2013. http://www.localytics.com/blog/2011/first-impressions-matter-26-percent-of-
apps-downloaded-used-just-once
[cix] Mon, Peter Farago on, Oct 22, and 2012. “App Engagement: The Matrix Reloaded.” Accessed
November 13, 2013. http://blog.flurry.com/bid/90743/App-Engagement-The-Matrix-Reloaded.
[cx] Dating, Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Tinder’s Sean Rad Hints At A. Future Beyond, and Says The
App Sees 350M Swipes A. Day. “Tinder’s Sean Rad Hints At A Future Beyond Dating, Says The
App Sees 350M Swipes A Day.” TechCrunch. Accessed November 13, 2013.
http://techcrunch.com/2013/10/29/sean-rad-disrupt/.
[cxi] “Snapchat: Self-destructing Messaging App Raises $60m in Funding.” The Guardian, June 25,
2013. http://www.theguardian.com/technology/appsblog/2013/jun/25/snapchat-app-self-destructing-
messaging.
[cxii] “Pinterest Does Another Massive Funding — $225 Million at $3.8 Billion Valuation
(Confirmed).” AllThingsD. Accessed November 13, 2013. http://allthingsd.com/20131023/pinterest-
does-another-massive-funding-225-million-at-3-8-billion-valuation/.
Chapter 6: What Are You Going to Do with This?
[cxiii] For further thoughts on the morality of designing behavior, see: Thaler, Richard H., Cass R.
Sunstein, and John P. Balz. Choice Architecture. SSRN Scholarly Paper. Rochester, NY: Social
Science Research Network, April 2, 2010. http://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=1583509.
[cxiv] White, Charlie. “Survey: Cellphones Vs. Sex – Which Wins? [INFOGRAPHIC].” Mashable,
August 3, 2011. http://mashable.com/2011/08/03/telenav-cellphone-infographic/.
[cxv] Bogost, Ian. “The Cigarette of This Century.” The Atlantic, June 6, 2012.
http://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2012/06/the-cigarette-of-this-century/258092/.
[cxvi] Freedman, David H. “The Perfected Self.” The Atlantic, June 2012.
http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2012/06/the-perfected-self/308970/.

[cxvii] Graham, Paul. “The Acceleration of Addictiveness,” July 2010. Accessed November 12,
2013 http://www.paulgraham.com/addiction.html.
[cxviii] “The Ethical Line in User Experience Research.” mUmBRELLA. Accessed November 13,
2013. http://mumbrella.com.au/the-ethical-line-in-user-experience-research-163114.
[cxix] “How Deceptive Is Your Persuasive Design?” Accessed November 13, 2013.
https://uxmag.com/articles/how-deceptive-is-your-persuasive-design.
[cxx] “GSB In Brief.” Accessed December 1, 2013.
http://www.gsb.stanford.edu/news/bmag/sbsm0911/ss-kenyan.html.
[cxxi] Stewart, David. Demystifying Slot Machines and Their Impact in the United States. American
Gaming Association, May 26, 2010.
http://www.americangaming.org/sites/default/files/uploads/docs/whitepapers/demystifying_slot_mach
[cxxii] Shermer, Michael. “How We Opt Out of Overoptimism: Our Habit of Ignoring What Is Real Is
a Double-Edged Sword: Scientific American.” Accessed November 13, 2013.
http://www.scientificamerican.com/article.cfm?id=opting-out-of-overoptimism.
[cxxiii] “The Curse of Cow Clicker: How a Cheeky Satire Became a Videogame Hit | Wired
Magazine | Wired.com.” Wired Magazine. Accessed November 13, 2013.
http://www.wired.com/magazine/2011/12/ff_cowclicker/.
[cxxiv] “Cowpocalypse Now.” Ian Bogost. Accessed November 13, 2013.
http://www.bogost.com/blog/cowpocalypse_now.shtml
Chapter 7:  Case Study: The Bible App
[cxxv] “On Fifth Anniversary of Apple iTunes Store, YouVersion Bible App Reaches 100 Million
Downloads: First-Ever Survey Shows How App Is Truly Changing Bible Engagement.” PRWeb, July
8, 2013. http://www.prweb.com/releases/2013/7/prweb10905595.htm.
[cxxvi] Tsotsis, Alexia. “Snapchat Snaps Up A $80M Series B Led By IVP At An $800M Valuation.”
TechCrunch. Accessed November 13, 2013. http://techcrunch.com/2013/06/22/source-snapchat-
snaps-up-80m-from-ivp-at-a-800m-valuation/.
[cxxvii] “YouVersion Infographics.” Accessed November 13, 2013. http://blog.youversion.com/wp-
content/uploads/2013/07/themobilebible1.jpg.
[cxxviii] Alford, Henry. “If I Do Humblebrag So Myself.” The New York Times, November 30,
2012, sec. Fashion & Style. http://www.nytimes.com/2012/12/02/fashion/bah-humblebrag-the-
unfortunate-rise-of-false-humility.html.
[cxxix] Tamir, Diana I., and Jason P. Mitchell. “Disclosing Information About the Self Is Intrinsically
Rewarding.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences (May 7, 2012): 201202129.
doi:10.1073/pnas.1202129109.
Chapter 8: Habit Testing and Where to Look for Habit-Forming Opportunities
[cxxx] Griffel, Mattan. “Discovering Your Aha! Moment.” GrowHack, December 4, 2012.
http://www.growhack.com/2012/12/04/discovering-your-aha-moment/.
[cxxxi] Graham, Paul. “Schlep Blindness,” January 2012. http://paulgraham.com/schlep.html
[cxxxii] Gascoigne, Joel. “Buffer October Update: $2,388,000 Annual Revenue Run Rate, 1,123,000
Users,” November 7, 2013. http://open.bufferapp.com/buffer-october-update-2388000-run-rate-
1123000-users/.
[cxxxiii] “I’m Joel Gascoigne, and This Is the Story Behind Buffer.” Life Hacker. Accessed
November 13, 2013. http://www.lifehacker.co.in/technology/Im-Joel-Gascoigne-and-This-Is-the-

Story-Behind-Buffer/articleshow/24271474.cms.
[cxxxiv] West, Nancy Martha, “Kodak and The Lens of Nostalgia” The University Press of Virginia.
2000. p.95
[cxxxv] Cosier, G., & Hughes, P. M. (2001). The Problem with Disruption. BT Technology, 19(4), 9.
[cxxxvi] Pickover, Clifford A. Time: A Traveler’s Guide. Oxford University Press, USA, 1998.
[cxxxvii] Stoll, Clifford. “The Internet? Bah!” Newsweek, February 27, 1995.
http://www.english.illinois.edu/-people-/faculty/debaron/582/582%20readings/stoll.pdf.
[cxxxviii] Maples, Jr, Mike. “Technology Waves and the Hypernet.” Roger and Mike’s Hypernet
Blog. Accessed November 13, 2013. http://rogerandmike.com/post/14629058018/technology-waves-
and-the-hypernet.
[cxxxix] “How to Get Startup Ideas,” November 2012. http://paulgraham.com/startupideas.html.

Table of Contents
Introduction
1. The Habit Zone
2. Trigger
3. Action
4. Variable Reward
5. Investment
6. What Are You Going To Do With This?
7. Case Study: The Bible App
8. Habit Testing and Where To Look For Habit-Forming Opportunities
Appendix
About the Authors
Acknowledgements
Contributors
Notes and Sources
[i]
[ii]
[iii]
[iv]
[v]
[vi]
[vii]
[viii]
[ix]
[x]
[xi]
[xii]
[xiii]
[xiv]
[xv]
[xvi]
[xvii]
[xviii]
[xix]
[xx]
[xxi]
[xxii]
[xxiii]
[xxiv]
[xxv]
[xxvi]
[xxvii]
[xxviii]

[xxix]
[xxx]
[xxxi]
[xxxii]
[xxxiii]
[xxxiv]
[xxxv]
[xxxvi]
[xxxvii]
[xxxviii]
[xxxix]
[xl]
[xli]
[xlii]
[xliii]
[xliv]
[xlv]
[xlvi]
[xlvii]
[xlviii]
[xlix]
[l]
[li]
[lii]
[liii]
[liv]
[lv]
[lvi]
[lvii]
[lviii]
[lix]
[lx]
[lxi]
[lxii]
[lxiii]
[lxiv]
[lxv]
[lxvi]
[lxvii]
[lxviii]
[lxix]
[lxx]
[lxxi]
[lxxii]
[lxxiii]

[lxxiv]
[lxxv]
[lxxvi]
[lxxvii]
[lxxviii]
[lxxix]
[lxxx]
[lxxxi]
[lxxxii]
[lxxxiii]
[lxxxiv]
[lxxxv]
[lxxxvi]
[lxxxvii]
[lxxxviii]
[lxxxix]
[xc]
[xci]
[xcii]
[xciii]
[xciv]
[xcv]
[xcvi]
[xcvii]
[xcviii]
[xcix]
[c]
[ci]
[cii]
[ciii]
[civ]
[cv]
[cvi]
[cvii]
[cviii]
[cix]
[cx]
[cxi]
[cxii]
[cxiii]
[cxiv]
[cxv]
[cxvi]
[cxvii]
[cxviii]

[cxix]
[cxx]
[cxxi]
[cxxii]
[cxxiii]
[cxxiv]
[cxxv]
[cxxvi]
[cxxvii]
[cxxviii]
[cxxix]
[cxxx]
[cxxxi]
[cxxxii]
[cxxxiii]
[cxxxiv]
[cxxxv]
[cxxxvi]
[cxxxvii]
[cxxxviii]
[cxxxix]
[ii]
[iii]
[iv]
[v]
[vi]
[vii]
[viii]
[ix]
[x]
[xi]
[xii]
[xiii]
[xiv]
[xv]
[xvi]
[xvii]
[xviii]
[xix]
[xx]
[xxi]
[xxii]
[xxiii]
[xxiv]
[xxv]

[xxvi]
[xxvii]
[xxviii]
[xxix]
[xxx]
[xxxi]
[xxxii]
[xxxiii]
[xxxiv]
[xxxv]
[xxxvi]
[xxxvii]
[xxxviii]
[xxxix]
[xl]
[xli]
[xlii]
[xliii]
[xliv]
[xlv]
[xlvi]
[xlvii]
[xlviii]
[xlix]
[l]
[li]
[lii]
[liii]
[liv]
[lv]
[lvi]
[lvii]
[lviii]
[lix]
[lx]
[lxi]
[lxii]
[lxiii]
[lxiv]
[lxv]
[lxvi]
[lxvii]
[lxviii]
[lxix]
[lxx]

[lxxi]
[lxxii]
[lxxiii]
[lxxiv]
[lxxv]
[lxxvi]
[lxxvii]
[lxxviii]
[lxxix]
[lxxx]
[lxxxi]
[lxxxii]
[lxxxiii]
[lxxxiv]
[lxxxv]
[lxxxvi]
[lxxxvii]
[lxxxviii]
[lxxxix]
[xc]
[xci]
[xcii]
[xciii]
[xciv]
[xcv]
[xcvi]
[xcvii]
[xcviii]
[xcix]
[c]
[ci]
[cii]
[ciii]
[civ]
[cv]
[cvi]
[cvii]
[cviii]
[cix]
[cx]
[cxi]
[cxii]
[cxiii]
[cxiv]
[cxv]

[cxvi]
[cxvii]
[cxviii]
[cxix]
[cxx]
[cxxi]
[cxxii]
[cxxiii]
[cxxiv]
[cxxv]
[cxxvi]
[cxxvii]
[cxxviii]
[cxxix]
[cxxxi]
[cxxxii]
[cxxxiii]
[cxxxiv]
[cxxxv]
[cxxxvi]
[cxxxvii]
[cxxxviii]
[cxxxix]

Table of Contents
Introduction
1. The Habit Zone
2. Trigger
3. Action
4. Variable Reward
5. Investment
6. What Are You Going To Do With This?
7. Case Study: The Bible App
8. Habit Testing and Where To Look For Habit-Forming Opportunities
Appendix
About the Authors
Acknowledgements
Contributors
Notes and Sources
[i]
[ii]
[iii]
[iv]
[v]
[vi]
[vii]
[viii]
[ix]
[x]
[xi]
[xii]
[xiii]
[xiv]
[xv]
[xvi]
[xvii]
[xviii]
[xix]
[xx]
[xxi]
[xxii]
[xxiii]
[xxiv]
[xxv]
[xxvi]
[xxvii]
[xxviii]

[xxix]
[xxx]
[xxxi]
[xxxii]
[xxxiii]
[xxxiv]
[xxxv]
[xxxvi]
[xxxvii]
[xxxviii]
[xxxix]
[xl]
[xli]
[xlii]
[xliii]
[xliv]
[xlv]
[xlvi]
[xlvii]
[xlviii]
[xlix]
[l]
[li]
[lii]
[liii]
[liv]
[lv]
[lvi]
[lvii]
[lviii]
[lix]
[lx]
[lxi]
[lxii]
[lxiii]
[lxiv]
[lxv]
[lxvi]
[lxvii]
[lxviii]
[lxix]
[lxx]
[lxxi]
[lxxii]
[lxxiii]

[lxxiv]
[lxxv]
[lxxvi]
[lxxvii]
[lxxviii]
[lxxix]
[lxxx]
[lxxxi]
[lxxxii]
[lxxxiii]
[lxxxiv]
[lxxxv]
[lxxxvi]
[lxxxvii]
[lxxxviii]
[lxxxix]
[xc]
[xci]
[xcii]
[xciii]
[xciv]
[xcv]
[xcvi]
[xcvii]
[xcviii]
[xcix]
[c]
[ci]
[cii]
[ciii]
[civ]
[cv]
[cvi]
[cvii]
[cviii]
[cix]
[cx]
[cxi]
[cxii]
[cxiii]
[cxiv]
[cxv]
[cxvi]
[cxvii]
[cxviii]

[cxix]
[cxx]
[cxxi]
[cxxii]
[cxxiii]
[cxxiv]
[cxxv]
[cxxvi]
[cxxvii]
[cxxviii]
[cxxix]
[cxxx]
[cxxxi]
[cxxxii]
[cxxxiii]
[cxxxiv]
[cxxxv]
[cxxxvi]
[cxxxvii]
[cxxxviii]
[cxxxix]
[ii]
[iii]
[iv]
[v]
[vi]
[vii]
[viii]
[ix]
[x]
[xi]
[xii]
[xiii]
[xiv]
[xv]
[xvi]
[xvii]
[xviii]
[xix]
[xx]
[xxi]
[xxii]
[xxiii]
[xxiv]
[xxv]

[xxvi]
[xxvii]
[xxviii]
[xxix]
[xxx]
[xxxi]
[xxxii]
[xxxiii]
[xxxiv]
[xxxv]
[xxxvi]
[xxxvii]
[xxxviii]
[xxxix]
[xl]
[xli]
[xlii]
[xliii]
[xliv]
[xlv]
[xlvi]
[xlvii]
[xlviii]
[xlix]
[l]
[li]
[lii]
[liii]
[liv]
[lv]
[lvi]
[lvii]
[lviii]
[lix]
[lx]
[lxi]
[lxii]
[lxiii]
[lxiv]
[lxv]
[lxvi]
[lxvii]
[lxviii]
[lxix]
[lxx]

[lxxi]
[lxxii]
[lxxiii]
[lxxiv]
[lxxv]
[lxxvi]
[lxxvii]
[lxxviii]
[lxxix]
[lxxx]
[lxxxi]
[lxxxii]
[lxxxiii]
[lxxxiv]
[lxxxv]
[lxxxvi]
[lxxxvii]
[lxxxviii]
[lxxxix]
[xc]
[xci]
[xcii]
[xciii]
[xciv]
[xcv]
[xcvi]
[xcvii]
[xcviii]
[xcix]
[c]
[ci]
[cii]
[ciii]
[civ]
[cv]
[cvi]
[cvii]
[cviii]
[cix]
[cx]
[cxi]
[cxii]
[cxiii]
[cxiv]
[cxv]

[cxvi]
[cxvii]
[cxviii]
[cxix]
[cxx]
[cxxi]
[cxxii]
[cxxiii]
[cxxiv]
[cxxv]
[cxxvi]
[cxxvii]
[cxxviii]
[cxxix]
[cxxxi]
[cxxxii]
[cxxxiii]
[cxxxiv]
[cxxxv]
[cxxxvi]
[cxxxvii]
[cxxxviii]
[cxxxix]
